.. _Perf Chapter:

The Linux perf utility
======================
..
   Local Variables
.. |TNTC| replace:: tables-next-to-code

This chapter demonstrates the use of the linux perf utility to understand the
low-level details of a simple Haskell program and how a memory layout
optimization that GHC performs, called |TNTC|, affects the performance of that
program. This chapter is not an exhaustive exploration of ``perf``. However,
after reading this chapter one will be able to understand ``perf``'s output, act
upon its output and employ ``perf`` on their own Haskell programs.

What is Tables-Next-to-Code
---------------------------

Tables-next-to-code (TNTC) is a memory layout optimization in GHC that has been
used for a very long time [#]_. Every heap object has an object header followed
by a payload. The contents of the header depends on the kind of build *and* the
type of object. For example, a profiling build will include ``StgProfHeader``,
while a parallel build adds an additional word to the header only for thunks
(not shown). The most important field is the ``info table pointer`` which points
the heap object's :term:`info table`. The info table is what the "tables" in
|TNTC| refers to.

Info tables store meta-information about the heap object and are central to the
execution model of the STG machine and consequently the runtime system. Just as
the contents of the header change by the type of object so does the contents of
the info table. For example, a :term:`PAP` add fields to track the number of
arguments left to apply, the number of arguments that have been applied, and a
pointer that logs the location of the caller. However, four fields in the entry
table are common to all info tables. These are the ``layout`` of the object,
which describes the layout for the garbage collector; the ``Closure Type``,
which is a constant that describes the kind of closure, for example, a
:term:`Thunk`, Data Constructor, :term:`PAP` etc.; the :term:`SRT` ``bitmap``,
which the garbage collector requires to collect :term:`CAF`'s. Lastly, the info
table will hold the :term:`entry code` pointer for the heap object if one exists
[#]_ . For more see :ghcSource:`InfoTables.h
<rts/include/rts/storage/InfoTables.h>` for exact details and other variants.

Here is a depiction of the heap object layout without |TNTC| enabled. Code is
represented in orange and data in blue. Boxes which have a dashed outline change
depending on the type of heap object and build:

.. tikz::
    :libs: decorations.pathreplacing, positioning
    :align: left

    \node at (8,1) [draw,rectangle, thick, fill=orange!20,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm] (ip) {Info Table Pointer};

    \node[right of=ip, draw,rectangle, dashed, thick, fill=orange!20,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, xshift=3cm] (prof) {StgProfHeader};

    \node[right of=prof, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=orange!20,
    minimum width=8cm, minimum height=2cm, xshift=5cm] (payload) {Payload};

    \draw[thick,decorate, decoration={brace,amplitude=4mm}]
    (6,2.25)--node[rotate=0, yshift=7mm](header){Object Header} (14,2.25);

    \node[below of=ip, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=blue!10,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, xshift=5cm, yshift=-3cm] (ecp) {Entry
    Code Pointer};

    \node[below of=ecp, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=blue!10,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, yshift=-1cm] (layout) {Layout};

    \node[below of=layout, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=blue!10,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, yshift=-1cm] (ct) {Closure Type};

    \node[below of=ct, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=blue!10,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, yshift=-1cm] (srt) {SRT Bitmap};

    \node[below of=srt, draw,rectangle, thick, dashed, fill=blue!10,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, yshift=-1cm] (other) {Type Specific
     Fields};

    \node[right of=ecp, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=orange!20,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, xshift=6cm] (ec) {Entry Code};

    \draw[->, thick] (ip.south) |- (ecp.north west) node[midway] {};
    \draw[->, thick] (ecp.east) |- (ec.west) node[midway] {};

Tables-next-to-code does two things: first it removes the entry code pointer
from the info table and second, it moves the entry code itself to the address
immediately after the info table and sets the info table pointer itself to the
address of the entry code. This setup allows the runtime system to save a
pointer indirection because the info table pointer now points to the entry code.
Thus, when jumping to the entry code, which is a common operation, the runtime
system saves a single indirection, but can still reference the fields of the
info table through a negative memory offset from the info table pointer.

Here is a depiction with |TNTC| enabled:

.. tikz::
    :libs: decorations.pathreplacing, positioning
    :align: left

    \node at (8,1) [draw,rectangle, thick, fill=orange!20,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm] (ip) {Info Table Pointer};

    \node[right of=ip, draw,rectangle, dashed, thick, fill=orange!20,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, xshift=3cm] (prof) {StgProfHeader};

    \node[right of=prof, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=orange!20,
    minimum width=8cm, minimum height=2cm, xshift=5cm] (payload) {Payload};

    \draw[thick,decorate, decoration={brace,amplitude=4mm}]
    (6,2.25)--node[rotate=0, yshift=7mm](header){Object Header} (14,2.25);

    \node[below of=ip, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=blue!10,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, xshift=5cm, yshift=-3cm] (layout) {Layout};

    \node[below of=layout, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=blue!10,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, yshift=-1cm] (ct) {Closure Type};

    \node[below of=ct, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=blue!10,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, yshift=-1cm] (srt) {SRT Bitmap};

    \node[below of=srt, draw,rectangle, thick, dashed, fill=blue!10,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, yshift=-1cm] (other) {Type Specific
     Fields};

    \node[below of=other, draw,rectangle, thick, fill=orange!20,
    minimum width=4cm, minimum height=2cm, yshift=-1cm] (ec) {Entry Code};

    \draw[->, thick] (ip.south) |- (ec.north west) node[midway] {};

The key change is that the info table pointer points to the entry code, while
the rest of the info table can still be referenced via negative offsets from the
entry code address.

So What is the Problem?
-----------------------

Tables-next-to-code has worked well for GHC for many years. However, it requires
precise control over the placement of data and code in object files which is
problematic for certain backends such as the LLVM backend. In addition, |TNTC|,
while good, precludes other optimization strategies that GHC might use. For
example, one could envision putting all info tables in a global offset table or
coalescing the tables into a single section in the object file. Such a strategy
might lead to better branch prediction, and therefore improved runtime
performance on modern hardware. In addition to other strategies, |TNTC| creates
far reaching and non-obvious effects in the compiler. For example, GHC does not
typically generate ``call`` or ``ret`` instructions [#]_.

Assessing the impact of |TNTC|
------------------------------

We'll compare two GHC's, both will be ``default`` [#]_ builds; one built with
|TNTC| enabled, which I'll call ``TNTC`` and one without, which I'll call
``NO-TNTC``. To compare the two we'll run GHC's nofib benchmark suite, and use
``perf`` to measure hardware and software events (more on these events later
Unfortunately, a `bug <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/22792>`__
prevents us from compiling both GHC's with :term:`DWARF` symbols. So we'll only
be able to annotate GHC's assembly output with the |TNTC| enabled GHC. All tests
will be run on a local machine running:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ screenfetch -n
    doyougnu@7thChamber
    OS: NixOS 23.11.20240312.51063ed (Tapir)
    Kernel: x86_64 Linux 6.7.9-xanmod1
    Uptime: 4h 36m
    Packages: 9119
    Shell: fish 3.7.0
    Resolution: 3000x1920
    WM: XMonad
    GTK Theme: Breeze-Dark [GTK2/3]
    Icon Theme: breeze
    Font: Sans Serif  10
    Disk: 608G / 1.3T (50%)
    CPU: AMD Ryzen 7 2700X Eight-Core @ 8x 3.7GHz
    GPU: NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti
    RAM: 6562MiB / 64217MiB

that is :ref:`set up <Repeatable Measurements>` for reproducible benchmarks.
Lastly, we'll alter ``perf_event_paranoid`` so that we can run ``perf`` and get
data as a normal user:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo sysctl -w kernel.perf_event_paranoid=0

Note that this is not safe setting even though it not a persistent change and
will be reset when you reboot your machine. Note that if you do not alter
``perf_event_paranoid`` you'll receive partial output from ``perf stat`` or have
to run all ``perf`` commands with ``sudo``. For example, metrics such as
``context-switches`` will be reported as 0 if ``perf_event_paranoid`` is greater
than 0.

How does Tables Next to Code Affect Performance
-----------------------------------------------

Below is a selection of the generated table from ``nofib`` which compares the
compilers on a series of small programs; typically each program is only a module
or two:

.. code-block:: bash

   NoFib Results

 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Program           Size    Allocs   Runtime   Elapsed  TotalMem
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             CS          +5.7%      0.0%     0.068     0.068      0.0%
            CSD          +5.6%      0.0%     -4.7%     -4.7%      0.0%
             FS          +5.8%      0.0%     +7.3%     +7.2%      0.0%
              S          +5.7%      0.0%     -0.0%     -0.1%      0.0%
             VS          +5.7%      0.0%    +12.2%    +12.2%      0.0%
            VSD          +5.5%      0.0%     0.005     0.005      0.0%
            VSM          +5.7%      0.0%     0.106     0.107      0.0%
           anna          +7.0%      0.0%    +12.2%    +12.3%      0.0%
           ansi          +3.2%      0.0%     +0.6%     +0.6%      0.0%
           atom          +3.5%      0.0%     +4.3%     +4.2%      0.0%
         awards          +3.3%      0.0%     -7.1%     -7.1%      0.0%
         banner          +2.6%      0.0%    +26.2%    +26.1%      0.0%
     bernouilli          +3.2%      0.0%     +8.0%     +8.0%      0.0%
          boyer          +3.2%      0.0%    +14.3%    +14.3%      0.0%
         boyer2          +3.4%      0.0%    +22.6%    +22.6%      0.0%
           bspt          +4.1%      0.0%     +7.4%     +7.4%      0.0%
         primes          +3.0%    +20.7%    +55.2%    +55.1%     +9.1%
         simple          +5.0%      0.0%     +7.1%     +7.1%     -6.9%
         ...
         many more...

A minus indicates that ``NO-TNTC`` performed better than ``TNTC``. These results
are expected; |TNTC| tends to outperform ``NO-TNTC`` because it saves a pointer
indirection in the runtime's evaluation of heap objects. Let's zoom into two
benchmark programs that show the largest signal: ``primes`` which shows ``TNTC``
performing 55% faster than ``NO-TNTC``, and ``awards`` which shows ``NO-TNTC``
performing 7% faster than ``TNTC``. We'll focus on ``awards`` because we want to
understand why exactly |TNTC| degrades for this exact program.

Awards
------

Here is the full ``awards`` program:

.. code-block:: haskell

   import QSort
   import Data.List((\\))
   import System.Environment
   import Control.Monad

   -- Generate all possible permutations of length m from a list of scores
   perms m [] = []
   perms 1 l  = map (: []) l
   perms m (n:ns) = map ((:) n) (perms (m-1) ns) ++ perms m ns

   -- Find the (sorted) list of possible awards for a list of scores
   awards scores =
   	award ("Gold",70) ++ award ("Silver",60) ++ award ("Bronze",50)
   	where sumscores = map (\ p -> (sum p, p)) (perms 3 scores)
   	      atleast threshold = filter (\(sum,p) -> sum >= threshold) sumscores
   	      award (name,threshold) = map (\ ps -> (name,ps)) (sort (atleast threshold))

   -- Find all possible awards for a list of scores, counting each score once only
   findawards scores | null theawards = []
     	          | otherwise = firstaward : findawards (scores \\ perm)
   	where firstaward@(award,(sum,perm)) = head theawards
   	      theawards = awards scores

   -- Find the awards for all competitors, each competitor is a pair of
   -- (Name, list of scores)
   findallawards competitors =
   	map (\ (name,scores) -> (name,findawards scores)) competitors

   competitors i =
     [ ("Simon",[35,27,40,i,34,21])
     , ("Hans",[23,19,45,i,17,10,5,8,14])
     , ("Phil",[1,18,i,20,21,19,34,8,16,21])
     , ("Kevin",[9,23,17,54,i,41,9,18,14])
     ]

   main = do
     (n:_) <- getArgs
     forM_ [1..read n] $ \i -> do
       print (findallawards (competitors (i `mod` 100)))

Notice that the only higher-ordered function is ``map`` and that all of the
function arguments to ``map`` are :term:`known function`'s because they are
lambdas. Note that this implementation does use a quick sort implementation
defined in ``QSort`` that I have elided.

Inspecting with Perf
--------------------

To investigate we'll compile and run the program in ``perf``. Perf is a
statistical profiler that outputs key CPU counters (these counters are called
`PMC
<https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/tool/performance-counter-monitor.html>`__'s
for the curious).

We begin with ``perf stat`` to get an overview of system behavior:

``TNTC``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ ../../../_build/stage1/bin/ghc -fforce-recomp -O2 Main.hs
   $ perf stat -- ./Main 1000000 > /dev/null

   Performance counter stats for './Main 1000000':

           74,973.30 msec task-clock                #    0.998 CPUs utilized
              13,878      context-switches          #  185.106 /sec
                 326      cpu-migrations            #    4.348 /sec
               1,343      page-faults               #   17.913 /sec
     304,754,865,610      cycles                    #    4.065 GHz
       4,568,540,020      stalled-cycles-frontend   #    1.50% frontend cycles idle
      30,297,886,463      stalled-cycles-backend    #    9.94% backend cycles idle
     446,573,548,830      instructions              #    1.47  insn per cycle
                                                    #    0.07  stalled cycles per insn
      93,343,159,669      branches                  #    1.245 G/sec
       2,225,134,283      branch-misses             #    2.38% of all branches

        75.094121462 seconds time elapsed

        74.605982000 seconds user
         0.360473000 seconds sys

This output is particular to my machine, your output is likely to be different
especially if you are using an Intel CPU rather than an AMD CPU. Consult the
`perf wiki <https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page>`__ or Brendan
Gregg's `perf page <https://www.brendangregg.com/linuxperf.html>`__ for details.

``perf stat`` will create a file with the raw data called ``perf.data``. If you
run perf many times then the old data will be stored in ``perf.data.old``.
Counters give a low level view of how our program is interacting with the
operating system and our machine. Here is a description of each counter perf
reported in order:

.. note:: You may see output such as ``task-clock:u`` instead of ``task-clock``
   (note the extra ``:u``). These suffixes are `modifiers
   <https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Tutorial#Counting_with_perf_stat>`__
   which indicate the level at which the event was measured. For example,
   ``cycles:k`` is the number of cycles that perf detected in kernel mode, while
   ``cycles:u`` is the number of cycles in user mode. By default, if given the
   proper permissions perf will measure both user and kernel level events. You
   can directly specify the levels by suffixing an event name with a modifier or
   combination of modifiers. For instance, ``perf stat -e task-clock:uk`` will
   measure the task-clock at both user and kernel level; see the ``perf-list``
   man page for more.

- ``task-clock``:. ``task-clock`` is a pre-defined software event that counts
  the time spent on the instrumented process. Not shown here is ``cpu-clock``
  which measures the passage of time using the Linux CPU clock.

- ``context-switches``: A context-switch is occurs when the operating system
  switches the CPU from executing one process or thread to another. Here we see
  13,878 such switches.

- ``cpu-migration``: Records the number of times the process moves from one CPU
  core to another during execution.

- ``page-faults``: This counts the number of times the process accesses memory
  that is not mapped into the current address space, thus requiring the
  operating system to load the memory page from disk. This metric counts both
  soft page faults and hard page faults.

- ``cycles``: This counts the number of CPU clock cycles the processor executed
  for the process.

- ``stalled-cycles-frontend``: This counts the number of CPU clock cycles during
  which the frontend of the CPU was waiting to fetch and decode instructions.
  There can be several reasons for frontend stalls, ranging from instruction
  cache misses, to branch mispredictions, to code bloat [#]_.

- ``stalled-cycles-backend``: This counts the number of CPU clock cycles during
  which the CPU backend was unable to execute instructions. A high count of
  stalled backend cycles means the CPU backend was waiting a long time in order
  to execute instructions. This usually implies data problems such as resource
  conflicts, lots of fetching data from disk, or data dependencies that
  prevented instruction level parallelism.

- ``instructions``: This counts the total number of instructions executed by the
  CPU for the process.

- ``branches``: This counts the total number of branch instructions that were
  executed by the CPU for the process.

- ``branch-misses``: This counts the number of times the branch predictor
  made the wrong branch prediction. Branch-misses reduce runtime
  performance because they lead to pipeline stalls.

- ``seconds time elapsed``: This is the total elapsed time from start to end of
  the perf profiling session.

- ``seconds user``: This is the total amount of CPU time spent in user-mode.
  This includes application code and libraries the process invokes.

- ``seconds sys``: This is the total amount CPU time spent executing in
  kernel-mode. This includes time spent on interrupts and syscalls.

Now let's check ``NO-TNTC``:

``NO-TNTC``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ perf stat -- ./Main 1000000 > /dev/null
   Performance counter stats for './Main 1000000':

           73,546.79 msec task-clock                #    0.996 CPUs utilized
              16,798      context-switches          #  228.399 /sec
                 238      cpu-migrations            #    3.236 /sec
               1,341      page-faults               #   18.233 /sec
     299,326,299,033      cycles                    #    4.070 GHz
       6,508,574,913      stalled-cycles-frontend   #    2.17% frontend cycles idle
      30,769,082,101      stalled-cycles-backend    #   10.28% backend cycles idle
     463,247,432,092      instructions              #    1.55  insn per cycle
                                                    #    0.07  stalled cycles per insn
      97,175,762,387      branches                  #    1.321 G/sec
       2,544,161,517      branch-misses             #    2.62% of all branches

        73.828987308 seconds time elapsed

        73.256927000 seconds user
         0.276380000 seconds sys

``NO-TNTC`` is roughly identical to ``TNTC``. What is surprising is that
``NO-TNTC`` is about 2 seconds faster than ``TNTC`` even though it processes 17
billion more instructions and 4 billion more branches. Also note that ``TNTC``
took 304 billion cycles, while ``NO-TNTC`` took 299 billion cycles. This is
suspicious, and is suggestive of some kind of cache-miss because ``TNTC`` is
taking *more* cycles to execute *less* instructions.


Checking the L1 cache
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Let's zoom in on the CPU caches. To do so we'll ask perf to only record events
that for the L1 cache. You can list all of the available software and hardware
events with ``perf stat``, for example we can just get the counters for the L1
cache:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ perf list | grep L1-.cache

     L1-dcache-loads OR cpu/L1-dcache-loads/
     L1-dcache-load-misses OR cpu/L1-dcache-load-misses/
     L1-dcache-prefetches OR cpu/L1-dcache-prefetches/
     L1-icache-loads OR cpu/L1-icache-loads/
     L1-icache-load-misses OR cpu/L1-icache-load-misses/

.. note:: Perf is capable of instrumenting ``raw counters`` that are not
   displayed in ``perf list``. These counters are full of interesting
   information. For example, ``L2_LINES_OUT.DEMAND_CLEAN`` is described as L2
   cache lines evicted by demand in `Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
   Developer's Manual Volume 3B: System Programming Guide, Part 2
   <https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/manuals/64-ia-32-architectures-software-developer-vol-3b-part-2-manual.pdf>`__.
   For AMD hardware see Section 13.2 of `AMD64 Architecture Programmer’s Manual
   Volume 2: System Programming
   <https://www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/documents/processor-tech-docs/programmer-references/24593.pdf>`__.
   To see how to utilize these raw counter with perf, see the `this section
   <https://www.brendangregg.com/perf.html#More>`__ of Brendan Gregg's perf
   resources.

and now we instrument perf to collect these counters for our program, note that
I am showing L1 cache misses here, but you could repeat this analysis with any
event of your choice:

``TNTC``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ perf stat -e L1-dcache-load-misses,L1-dcache-loads,L1-icache-loads,L1-icache-load-misses,iTLB-loads,iTLB-load-misses -- ./Main 1000000 > /dev/null


    Performance counter stats for './Main 1000000':

   4,484,273,070      L1-dcache-load-misses #   2.37% of all L1-dcache accesses
 189,375,754,119      L1-dcache-loads
  51,013,174,365      L1-icache-loads
   8,601,767,295      L1-icache-load-misses #   16.86% of all L1-icache accesses

    74.512034367 seconds time elapsed

    74.457035000 seconds user
     0.096120000 seconds sys

``TNTC`` shows a whopping 8.6 billion (roughly 16%) instruction cache load
misses. Let's check ``NO-TNTC``:

``NO-TNTC``:

.. code-block:: bash

  Performance counter stats for './Main 1000000':

   4,607,677,283      L1-dcache-load-misses #    2.03% of all L1-dcache accesses
 227,182,887,281      L1-dcache-loads
  53,627,901,936      L1-icache-loads
   3,579,524,387      L1-icache-load-misses #    6.67% of all L1-icache accesses

    73.919326122 seconds time elapsed

    73.520569000 seconds user
     0.252386000 seconds sys

``NO-TNTC`` shows 3.5 billion L1 instruction cache misses, that is 5 billion
less than ``TNTC``. This is the likely cause of the runtime difference between
the two.

But we can go farther. Since we can instrument the ``awards`` benchmark with
DWARF symbols with the ``TNTC`` enabled GHC, we can annotate the Haskell source
code with counts of ``L1-icache-load-misses``. To do so we'll run ``perf``
``record`` and then construct a report with ``perf report``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ perf record -e L1-icache-load-misses -- ./Main 1000000 > /dev/null
   [ perf record: Woken up 44 times to write data ]
   [ perf record: Captured and wrote 11.002 MB perf.data (287440 samples) ]

   $ perf report
   # To display the perf.data header info, please use --header/--header-only options.
   #
   #
   # Total Lost Samples: 0
   #
   # Samples: 268K of event 'L1-icache-load-misses'
   # Event count (approx.): 5137935523
   #
   # Overhead  Command     Shared Object         Symbol
   # ........  ..........  ....................  ............................................................................
   #
       10.10%  Main        Main                  [.] ghczmbignum_GHCziNumziInteger_integerAdd_info
        7.94%  Main        Main                  [.] stg_upd_frame_info+0xffffffffffc00003
        5.79%  Main        Main                  [.] ghczminternal_GHCziInternalziBase_map_info
        3.91%  Main        Main                  [.] _ghczminternal_GHCziInternalziIOziHandleziText_zdwwriteBlocks_r5v0_entry
        3.76%  Main        Main                  [.] stg_unpack_cstring_utf8_info+0xffffffffffc00064
        3.47%  Main        Main                  [.] ghczmbignum_GHCziNumziInteger_integerGe_info
        3.10%  Main        Main                  [.] stg_IND_STATIC_info+0xffffffffffc00004
        2.56%  Main        Main                  [.] ghczmbignum_GHCziNumziInteger_integerSub_info
        2.14%  Main        Main                  [.] _ghczminternal_GHCziInternalziBase_sat_s4Ew_entry
        2.00%  Main        Main                  [.] _ghczminternal_GHCziInternalziBase_sat_s4Ex_entry

We see that perf reports 10% of the misses come from the
``ghc-bignum::GHC.Num.Integer.integerAdd`` info table, ~6% comes from the
``ghc-internal::Ghc.Internal.Base.map`` info table, and ~3.5% come from
``ghc-bignum::GHC.Num.Integer.integerGe`` (i.e., a greater-than comparison).

.. note:: In general, symbols from the runtime system such as
   ``stg_upd_frame_info...`` will occur in the perf output. Typically you do not
   need to consider them because by virtue of being part of the runtime system and
   they will change in response to optimizing the source code.

By default perf opens a TUI and displays samples by function symbol. There are
other display options, for example we can instrument the report by command and
by shared object by passing ``--sort comm,dso``. We can also print to ``stdout``
by passing ``--stdio`` and emit machine information with ``--header``. Here is
an example of such an invocation:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ perf report --stdio --sort comm,dso
   # To display the perf.data header info, please use --header/--header-only options.
   #
   #
   # Total Lost Samples: 0
   #
   # Samples: 262K of event 'L1-icache-load-misses'
   # Event count (approx.): 3955381394
   #
   # Overhead  Command     Shared Object
   # ........  ..........  .................
   #
       99.04%  Main        Main
        0.62%  Main        [kernel.kallsyms]
        0.13%  ghc_ticker  [kernel.kallsyms]
        0.10%  Main        [nvidia]
        0.05%  Main        libc.so.6
        0.02%  ghc_ticker  Main
        0.01%  Main        [vdso]
        0.01%  Main        [xhci_hcd]
        0.01%  ghc_ticker  libc.so.6
        0.00%  Main        [usbcore]
        0.00%  Main        [hid]
        0.00%  Main        [snd_usb_audio]
        0.00%  Main        [nvidia_uvm]
        0.00%  Main        [nvidia_modeset]
        0.00%  Main        [evdev]
        0.00%  perf-exec   [kernel.kallsyms]

For our purposes with ``awards`` this isn't useful because we only have a single
module. If we had more modules and packages then sorting by shared object would
help us pinpoint the package where the regression we're interested in occurred.
Here is an example of the header:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ perf report --stdio --header
   # ========
   # captured on    : Tue Apr  9 14:12:28 2024
   # header version : 1
   # data offset    : 320
   # data size      : 10527008
   # feat offset    : 10527328
   # hostname : 7thChamber
   # os release : 6.7.9-xanmod1
   # perf version : 6.6.21
   # arch : x86_64
   # nrcpus online : 8
   # nrcpus avail : 8
   # cpudesc : AMD Ryzen 7 2700X Eight-Core Processor
   # cpuid : AuthenticAMD,23,8,2
   # total memory : 65758408 kB
   # cmdline : /nix/store/z7vdgrrvg38hac3qns4hf2xpzhbjh1vk-perf-linux-6.6.21/bin/.perf-wrapped record -e L1-icache-load-misses -- ./Main 1000000
   # event : name = L1-icache-load-misses, , id = { 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 }, type = 3 (PERF_TYPE_HW_CACHE), size = 136, config = 0x10001 (PERF_COUNT_HW_CACHE_RESULT_MISS | PERF_COUNT_HW_CACHE_OP_READ | PERF_COUNT_HW_CACHE_L1I), { sample_period, sample_freq } = 4000, sample_type = IP|TID|TIME|PERIOD, read_format = ID|LOST, disabled = 1, inherit = 1, mmap = 1, comm = 1, freq = 1, enable_on_exec = 1, task = 1, sample_id_all = 1, exclude_guest = 1, mmap2 = 1, comm_exec = 1, ksymbol = 1, bpf_event = 1
   # CPU_TOPOLOGY info available, use -I to display
   # NUMA_TOPOLOGY info available, use -I to display
   # pmu mappings: cpu = 4, amd_iommu_0 = 10, breakpoint = 5, kprobe = 8, msr = 11, power = 12, software = 1, tracepoint = 2, uprobe = 9
   # CACHE info available, use -I to display
   # time of first sample : 19867.055233
   # time of last sample : 19932.760237
   # sample duration :  65705.004 ms
   # MEM_TOPOLOGY info available, use -I to display
   # bpf_prog_info 20: bpf_prog_713a545fe0530ce7_restrict_filesystems addr 0xffffffffc00f06ac size 308
   ...
   ... ## bunch of bpf output similar to above
   ...
   # cpu pmu capabilities: max_precise=0
   # missing features: TRACING_DATA BRANCH_STACK GROUP_DESC AUXTRACE STAT CLOCKID DIR_FORMAT COMPRESSED CLOCK_DATA HYBRID_TOPOLOGY
   # ========


Okay back to the program at hand. The perf output has suggested that the
instruction cache misses are originating from some kind of traversal (hence the
``Base.map``) which is comparing integers (hence the ``Num.Integer.integerGe``)
and eventually summing (hence the ``Num.Integer.integerAdd``). This is enough
information to roughly guess where the misses are originating from. If we check
the source code there is only one reference to ``(>=)`` and it occurs in the
``awards`` function in the ``atleast`` helper:

.. code-block:: haskell

   awards scores =
     ...
     where sumscores = map (\ p -> (sum p, p)) (perms 3 scores)
           atleast threshold = filter (\(sum,p) -> sum >= threshold) sumscores
           ...

Notice that ``atleast`` uses a filter over ``sumscores``, our ``map`` likely
originates from ``sumscores``, and the ``integerGe`` and ``integerAdd`` from
``sum >= threshold``. But this is guess work. For optimization we want to
:ref:`Don't Think, Look`, so are sure these functions are the functions we need
to repair.

Mapping Perf Output to The Haskell Program
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To connect the perf results with our program we can check the ``Cmm`` of the
program to get the :term:`Occurrence Name` of the function that is calling the
symbols we identified above. Note that we could also check the assembly output,
but ``Cmm`` is more concise, and because we are inspecting info tables, this
information will be more explicit in ``Cmm``. See the :ref:`Reading Cmm <Reading
Cmm>` for a refresher if needed. An alternative approach is to use
:ref:`Cachegrind <Cachegrind Chapter>` and annotate the source code by compiling
with :term:`DWARF` symbols.

So we'll dump all the intermediate representations and count the references to
``integerAdd_info``:

.. code-block:: bash

   ### dump the IRs
   $ ghc -fforce-recomp -O2 -ddump-asm -ddump-cmm -ddump-stg-final -ddump-simpl -ddump-to-file -g Main.hs
   [1 of 3] Compiling QSort            ( QSort.hs, QSort.o )
   ...
   [3 of 3] Linking Main [Objects changed]

And now count the references:

.. code-block:: haskell

   $ cat Main.dump-cmm | grep integerAdd_info | wc -l
   2

We have exactly 2 references. What we want is to find the Cmm Label that hold
the occurrence name. Here is the first match:

.. code-block:: haskell

   [go2_r3RZ_entry() { //  [R3, R2]
   ...
       c4al: // c49Z/c4a7
           unwind Sp = Just Sp;
           I64[Sp - 16] = c4aa;
           R3 = P64[_s3Uf::P64 + 6];
           R2 = _s3Ug::P64;
           P64[Sp - 8] = P64[_s3Uf::P64 + 14];
           Sp = Sp - 16;
           unwind Sp = Just Sp + 16;
           call GHC.Num.Integer.integerAdd_info(R3,
                                                R2) returns to c4aa, args: 8, res: 8, upd: 8;

we see that the occurrence name ``go2_r3RZ_entry`` calls
``GHC.Num.Integer.integerAdd_info`` with the contents of ``R3`` and ``R2`` in
block label ``c4al``.
Here is the second reference:

.. code-block:: haskell

   Main.$wmain_entry() { //  []
   ...
   c4nB: // c4mR/c4n2/c4n9/c4nf/c4nk/c4no/c4nv
       unwind Sp = Just Sp + 24;
       _s3VP::P64 = P64[Sp + 8];
       I64[Sp + 8] = c4nD;
       R3 = lvl16_r3RV_closure+1;
       R2 = _s3VP::P64;
       Sp = Sp + 8;
       unwind Sp = Just Sp + 16;
       call GHC.Num.Integer.integerAdd_info(R3,
                                            R2) returns to c4nD, args: 8, res: 8, upd: 8;

Notice that both call sites exist in the entry code due to the ``_entry``
suffix. The first call site belongs to the function ``go2_r3RZ``, and the second
is for worker of ``main``, hence the ``$w`` prefix. We're interested in
``go2_r3RZ``; if we inspect the :ref:`Stg <Reading Stg>` we should be able to
find that occurrence name:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ cat Main.dump-stg-final | grep go2_r3RZ | wc -l
   3

There are three references, here is are the relevant parts of the Stg dump:

.. code-block:: haskell

   Rec {
   go2_r3RZ :: [GHC.Num.Integer.Integer] -> GHC.Num.Integer.Integer -> GHC.Num.Integer.Integer
   [GblId[StrictWorker([!, !])],
    Arity=2,
    Str=<1L><1L>,
    Unf=OtherCon []] =
       {} \r [ds_s3Uf eta_s3Ug]
           case ds_s3Uf of {
             [] -> eta_s3Ug;
             : y_s3Ui [Occ=Once1] ys_s3Uj [Occ=Once1] ->
                 case
                     GHC.Num.Integer.integerAdd eta_s3Ug y_s3Ui
                 of
                 sat_s3Uk [Occ=Once1]
                 {
                 __DEFAULT -> case ys_s3Uj of ys_t3WF [Occ=Once1] {
                    __DEFAULT -> go2_r3RZ ys_t3WF sat_s3Uk;
                    };
                 };
           };
   end Rec }

   lvl18_r3S0 :: [GHC.Num.Integer.Integer] -> (GHC.Num.Integer.Integer, [GHC.Num.Integer.Integer])
   [GblId, Arity=1, Str=<L>, Cpr=1, Unf=OtherCon []] =
       {} \r [p_s3Ul]
           let {
             sat_s3Um [Occ=Once1] :: GHC.Num.Integer.Integer
             [LclId] =
                 {p_s3Ul} \u []
                     case p_s3Ul of p_t3WH { __DEFAULT -> go2_r3RZ p_t3WH lvl17_r3RY; };
           } in  (,) [sat_s3Um p_s3Ul];

We see that ``go2_r3RZ`` is a recursive function with the type: ``go2_r3RZ :: [GHC.Num.Integer.Integer] -> GHC.Num.Integer.Integer -> GHC.Num.Integer.Integer``. Notably, ``go2_r3RZ``'s only call site is in a floated out function
``lvl18_r3S0`` (``lvl18_r3S0`` is floated out because it has the ``lvl``
prefix, which only comes from the float out pass in the simplifier). So,
``go2_r3RZ`` takes a list of integers and another integer, and produces an
integer. Thus ``go2_r3RZ`` must be some kind of fold. From inspecting the body,
we see that the second input ``eta_s3Ug`` is returned if the first input,
``ds_s3Uf`` is an empty list. If ``ds_s3Uf`` is not empty then the function adds
the head of the list to the second input in this line:
``GHC.Num.Integer.integerAdd eta_s3Ug y_s3Ui``, binds ``sat_s3Uk`` to the result
and calls ``go2_r3RZ`` with the rest of the list and the new input. This should
sound familiar; this is the Stg of the ``sum`` function. ``ds_s3Uf`` is the
input list, and ``eta_s3Ug`` is the accumulator. Then for each element of the
list we add the element to the accumulator. In fact, we can add confidence to
our conclusion by checking the :ref:`Core <Reading Core>`, which will include
source code location tags:


.. code-block:: haskell

   Rec {
   -- RHS size: {terms: 12, types: 8, coercions: 0, joins: 0/0}
   go2_r3RZ :: [Integer] -> Integer -> Integer
   [GblId[StrictWorker([!, !])], Arity=2, Str=<1L><1L>, Unf=OtherCon []]
   go2_r3RZ
     = \ (ds_a3Nw :: [Integer]) (eta_B0 [OS=OneShot] :: Integer) ->
         case ds_a3Nw of {
           [] -> eta_B0;
           : y_a3Nz ys_a3NA ->
             go2_r3RZ ys_a3NA (GHC.Num.Integer.integerAdd eta_B0 y_a3Nz)
         }
   end Rec }

   -- RHS size: {terms: 6, types: 5, coercions: 0, joins: 0/0}
   lvl18_r3S0 :: [Integer] -> (Integer, [Integer])
   [GblId, Arity=1, Str=<L>, Cpr=1, Unf=OtherCon []]
   lvl18_r3S0
     = \ (p_a1tH :: [Integer]) ->
         src<Main.hs:43:31-49>
         (src<Main.hs:43:40-44> go2_r3RZ p_a1tH lvl17_r3RY,
          src<Main.hs:43:47> p_a1tH)


From the above Core, we can see that the callsite of ``go2_r3RZ`` is exactly at
``Main.hs`` line 43, characters 40-44 and inside a tuple, which corresponds to
this line in ``awards``:

.. code-block:: haskell

        --                                 right here
        --                               /
        --                               |
        --                               v
   	where sumscores = map (\ p -> (sum p, p)) (perms 3 scores)


Now we can rephrase our working hypothesis: the ``awards`` program exhibits an
L1 instruction cache miss rate of 16% with |TNTC|, with the call to ``sum`` in
``sumscores`` being responsible for 10% of the 16% miss rate. We now have a
means of inspecting the program we want to optimize and a means for detecting if
our optimizations have an impact.

Conclusion
----------

We've come a long way. We've used perf to understand the machine behavior of a
Haskell program, identified a hot spot that would not be possible using GHC's
tooling, and mapped that hot spot to the relevant function in the Haskell
program. We have not fixed the hot spot, leaving that to future work, but we
have gained a probe to :ref:`Don't Think, Look`, and gained a deeper
understanding of how our program actually runs. To conclude the chapter, we'll
show how to programmatically consume perf output so that you may integrate it
into whatever workflow needed, and useful one-liners.

Programmatically Consuming Perf Output
--------------------------------------

Imagine that you would like to use ``perf`` in your project's continuous
integration to catch future L1 instruction cache miss regressions, or to track
any other low level metric. ``perf stat`` helpfully provides the option ``-x``
to emit information via a separator and the option ``-o`` to output to a file.
Here are some examples:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ perf stat -x, -- ./Main 1000000 > /dev/null
   64701.16,msec,task-clock,64701157666,100.00,1.002,CPUs utilized
   6733,,context-switches,64701157666,100.00,104.063,/sec
   153,,cpu-migrations,64701157666,100.00,2.365,/sec
   1291,,page-faults,64701157666,100.00,19.953,/sec
   264690533400,,cycles,64701157666,100.00,4.091,GHz
   5760949125,,stalled-cycles-frontend,64701157666,100.00,2.18,frontend cycles idle
   18551959048,,stalled-cycles-backend,64701157666,100.00,7.01,backend cycles idle
   425064193324,,instructions,64701157666,100.00,1.61,insn per cycle
   ,,,,,0.04,stalled cycles per insn
   85795758030,,branches,64701157666,100.00,1.326,G/sec
   2404110819,,branch-misses,64701157666,100.00,2.80,of all branches

Notice the ``-x,`` which instructs perf to use a comma as a separator. We can
also combine this with the ``-e`` option to track only the events we care about:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ perf stat -x, -e instructions,branch-misses -- ./Main 1000000 > /dev/null
   425066725899,,instructions,63633632343,100.00,,
   2367849357,,branch-misses,63633632343,100.00,,

And we can emit this all to a file of our choosing, with ``-o``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ perf stat -x, -e instructions,branch-misses -o my-perf-data -- ./Main 1000000 > /dev/null
   $ cat my-perf-data
   # started on Wed Apr 24 11:18:56 2024

   425115750611,,instructions,64005529152,100.00,,
   2397300420,,branch-misses,64005529152,100.00,,

And of course we can pipe this to ``awk`` to post process and grab the values:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ cat my-perf-data | awk -F',' '{print $1}'
   # started on Wed Apr 24 11:18:56 2024

   425115750611
   2397300420

Or you can have perf directly generate json with the ``-j`` flag:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ perf stat -j -e instructions,branch-misses -- ./Main 1000000 > /dev/null
   {"counter-value" : "425045921494.000000"
   , "unit" : ""
   , "event" : "instructions"
   , "event-runtime" : 62691486738
   , "pcnt-running" : 100.00
   , "metric-value" : "0.000000"
   , "metric-unit" : "insn per cycle"
   }
   {"counter-value" : "2393928086.000000"
   , "unit" : ""
   , "event" : "branch-misses"
   , "event-runtime" : 62691486738
   , "pcnt-running" : 100.00
   , "metric-value" : "0.000000"
   , "metric-unit" : "of all branches"
   }


Helpful One Liners
------------------

The most robust list is given by `Brendan Gregg <https://www.brendangregg.com/perf.html#OneLiners>`__.

#. Visualizing with `speedscope <https://www.speedscope.app/>`__. Speedscope
   directly `supports
   <https://github.com/jlfwong/speedscope/wiki/Importing-from-perf-(linux)>`__
   perf. You can drop your ``perf.data`` directly into the web app or if you
   have speedscope installed locally you can just do:

   .. code-block:: bash

      $ perf script -i perf.data | speedscope -


.. admonition:: Help Wanted
   :class: help-wanted

   If you come up with some useful one liners then please `open
   <https://github.com/haskellfoundation/hs-opt-handbook.github.io>`__ pull
   request and contribute to the Haskell community!



References and Further Reading
------------------------------

#. The :ghcWiki:`Info Tables wiki <rts/storage/heap-objects#info-tables>` entry

#. The |TNTC| `discussion <https://lists.llvm.org/pipermail/llvm-dev/2012-February/047544.html>`__
   on the llvm mailing list.

#. For more |TNTC| description see: :cite:t:`fastCurry` Section 4.4, and
   :cite:t:`pointerTaggingLaziness` Section 2, :cite:t:`jones1992implementing`
   Section 7.


#. `This <http://sandsoftwaresound.net/perf/perf-tutorial-hot-spots/>`__ perf
   tutorial, which shows the use of perf to find hotspots on a raspberry pi.

#. The `perf wiki <https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page>`__.


Footnotes
---------

.. [#] In fact it was even described in the canonical STG paper: see
       :cite:t:`jones1992implementing` Section 7.6.

.. [#] There are exceptions to this because not all heap objects require an
       entry code. For example:

       #. PAP's do not require an entry code because they can only be applied to
          more arguments using the :ref:`Generic Apply Functions <Reading Stg>`.

       #. :term:`Unlifted` objects cannot be evaluated and therefore don't have
          an entry code.

.. [#] I say "typically" because GHC will use ``call`` in some circumstances
       such as creating :term:`CAF`'s, see :ghcSource:`Note [CAF management]
       <rts/sm/Storage.c?ref_type=heads#L425>`. The reasons GHC does not use
       ``call`` or ``ret`` are deeply ingrained. First, GHC maintains a separate
       stack from the system-supported C stack. The tradeoff is that this allows
       GHC to completely maintain its own stack, create many tiny stacks for
       each thread, check for stack overflow and reallocate the stack if
       necessary. If GHC generated ``call`` and ``ret`` instructions, and used
       the C stack then it would lose these capabilities, but in return gain
       better branch prediction by virtue of the ``call`` and ``ret``
       instructions which have special support in most hardware. In this case,
       GHC would have to push a return address or a continuation to the C stack
       in order to use the ``call`` and ``ret`` instructions. The second reason
       is that a ``case`` is operationally preceded by an info table that
       describes its stack frame layout. If the scrutinee of the ``case`` is
       evaluated via a ``call`` which then returns with ``ret``, then upon a
       return, control flow will be at the instruction *after* the case.
       Therefore, the info table would no longer be *immediately* before the
       return address and thus create havoc in the garbage collector which
       relies on that information. Thus, if ``case`` and ``ret`` are to be used,
       then the runtime cannot rely on |TNTC| since the tables will no longer be
       next to the relevant code. See :cite:t:`pointerTaggingLaziness` Section
       7.1, which I have heavily borrowed from here for more.


.. [#] GHC can be built in many different ways which we call ``flavors``. The
       ``default`` flavor is one such provided by GHC's build tool `Hadrian
       <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/blob/master/hadrian/README.md?ref_type=heads>`__.

.. [#] Larger code size will slow down the program because there is simply more
       code to process. But its contribution to runtime performance is not as
       great as the *locality* between data and the code operating on the data.
       This is why code bloat is problematic; with lots of code, achieving
       locality between code and data becomes much harder. See `this
       presentation
       <https://harmful.cat-v.org/software/OO_programming/_pdf/Pitfalls_of_Object_Oriented_Programming_GCAP_09.pdf>`__
       for more.
