.. _klister case study:

..
   Local Variables
.. |klister| replace:: `klister <https://github.com/gelisam/klister/>`__
.. |MegaParsec| replace:: `MegaParsec <https://hackage.haskell.org/package/megaparsec>`__

`Klister: A First Pass Performance Engineering`
===============================================

This chapter is a case study on a first pass of performance engineering for the
|klister| programming language interpreter. This case study should be exemplary
of any system which is shortlived, has distinct phases of input and output, and
maintains state. To diagnose the performance issues this case study uses
:ref:`Heap Profiling <Heap Profiling Chapter>` with :ref:`Eventlog <EventLog
Chapter>`, :ref:`Info Table Profiling <IPE Chapter>`, :ref:`TickyTicky <Ticky
Chapter>` profiling. The optimizations are simply choosing better data
structures and closing memory leaks; any intermediate level Haskeller should be
able to follow along. After reading this chapter, a reader should be able to
spot inefficient data structure use by reading code, and utilize profiling
techniques to diagnose memory performance issues and identify hot code.

The rest of the chapter is structured as follows. We introduce the |klister|
interpreter and perform a performance minded code review. We then use the
klister testsuite to identify a poor performing program. Using this program we
begin performance engineering by: identifying a problem, implementing a change,
testing that the change was effective, and then repeating the process having
either made progress or by changing another part of the interpreter.

Introduction to the System
--------------------------

The system we are analyzing is the interpreter for |Klister|. Klister is an
interpreted scheme-like programming language. The exact kind of language is not
particularly relevant, but one can expect it to have typical scheme features
such as s-expression syntax, hygenic macros and lexical scoping. All we need to
know about that the klister interpreter inputs a program, parses the program,
maintains mutable stores of variables and outputs a result.

To begin performance engineering we'll review the subsystems that compose the
interpreter. In klister, there are 4 major subsystem:

#. Parser: The system that lexes and tokenizes. Klister employs |MegaParsec| for
   its parser.
#. Expander: klister is a scheme-like language with hygenic macros. This
   subsystem performs the macro expansion and elaboration typical to these
   kinds of programming languages.
#. Type Checker: klister is a pure functional language with Hindley-Milner type
   checking and higher-ordered types, including type safe macros. This subsystem
   type checks klister code.
#. Evaluator: The evaluator inputs an abstract syntax tree which represents a
   klister program, executes program in the Haskell runtime system and
   outputs the result.


Characterizing the Problem
--------------------------

Our goal is to speed up the klister interpreter, but this goal is too vague and
is not actionable. We first need to be able to make statements that are precise
enough to be actionable. That is, we need to have a reproducible test to observe
where time is spent, and, where and how much memory is allocated and consumed.
Then we can correlate these costs to particular subsystems in the interpreter.
For example, we wish to be able to say "The parser finishes a 100 line program
in 100ms and runs in 100Kb of constant space, but the expander allocates 2Gb and
finishes its computation in 2 minutes!". Once we can make precise statements, we
can begin forming hypotheses to speed up the system.

We'll use klister's testsuite to find a reproducible test. The testsuite
provides good sample of programs and will allow us to find a *degenerate*
program. With a degenerate program, we'll record and correlate runtime costs to
each subsystem and find the offending piece of source code.

.. note::

  A quick note on these degenerate programs and a mental model that you might
  find useful. In the abstract, we can think about the *system space* of the
  system. The system space is the space of all possible semantically equivalent
  systems, for some input and for some available resources. For example, for
  klister, given the input program ``(+ 2 2)`` we have an infinite space of
  possible klister interpreters, some with many machine resources and some with
  few. Similarly, given the same machine to run the klister interpreter, and
  the same input program, we still have an infinite space of klister
  interpreters, some of which will be very fast (in wall time) and some will be
  very slow, depending on their implementation.

  Now we can imagine that there are boundaries [#]_ in this system space that
  delineate acceptable performance from unacceptable performance, however one
  defines performance and what is acceptable. These degenerate programs are
  inputs *that point to such a boundary*, and thus they are useful allies in our
  performance work. As we improve the interpreter these boundaries will change,
  the space of acceptability will grow and we'll have to find even more
  degenerate programs to observe the boundaries again.

Performance Minded Code Review
------------------------------

Before running the testsuite, we'll begin with a code review to better
understand the interpreter and to read through the code with a performance
engineering mindset. Here is a list of things that are noticeable from reading
through the source code.

#. Lazy ``Data.Map`` in the interpreter state.
#. Lazy ``modifyIORef`` in the interpreter state.
#. Use of lazy tuples throughout the code base.
#. Lists used as general purpose containers.
#. Lazy State Monad especially in the Expander.
#. Lazy WriterT monad transformer in the Expander.
#. Use of Monad Transformers and ExceptT in the interpreter state.
#. Lack of Specialization, especially in ``IORef`` utilities module and in lens
   driven code.
#. Some modules do not use explicit exports.
#. No use of ``-funbox-strict-fields`` for bang patterns or ``UNPACK`` pragmas.
#. Using ``foldr`` on a list (see ``Expander.getExports``) even though the code
   does not exploit laziness.
#. Using ``Integer`` instead of ``Int``.

We won't being going through each in detail, but instead just highlight a few
consequential items. Note that not all of these need to be fixed or are
categorically a mistake. It depends on what the system is trying to do and how
the implementation is trying to realize the system. For example, there might be
a perfectly good reason to use an ``Integer`` over an ``Int``, such as one
expects to handle data past the ``Int`` range.

Data.Map With Expensive Keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``ExpanderState`` is a key type in the klister interpreter. It is stored in
an ``IORef`` and maintains state for the expander. From a performance
perspective the ``ExpanderState`` is suspect because it employs data structures
that are lazy and yet the interpreter will eventually use everything in the
state. Here is the definition of the ``ExpanderState``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   data ExpanderState = ExpanderState
  { _expanderWorld :: !(World Value)
  , _expanderNextScopeNum :: !Int
  , _expanderGlobalBindingTable :: !BindingTable
  , _expanderExpansionEnv :: !ExpansionEnv
  , _expanderTasks :: [(TaskID, ExpanderLocal, ExpanderTask)]
  , _expanderOriginLocations :: !(Map.Map SplitCorePtr SrcLoc)
  , _expanderCompletedCore :: !(Map.Map SplitCorePtr (CoreF TypePatternPtr PatternPtr SplitCorePtr))
  , _expanderCompletedPatterns :: !(Map.Map PatternPtr (ConstructorPatternF PatternPtr))
  , _expanderCompletedTypePatterns :: !(Map.Map TypePatternPtr TypePattern)
  , _expanderPatternBinders :: !(Map.Map PatternPtr (Either [PatternPtr] (Scope, Ident, Var, SchemePtr)))
  , _expanderTypePatternBinders :: !(Map.Map TypePatternPtr [(Scope, Ident, Var, SchemePtr)])
  , _expanderCompletedTypes :: !(Map.Map SplitTypePtr (TyF SplitTypePtr))
  , _expanderCompletedDeclTrees :: !(Map.Map DeclTreePtr (DeclTreeF DeclPtr DeclTreePtr))
  , _expanderCompletedDecls :: !(Map.Map DeclPtr (Decl SplitTypePtr SchemePtr DeclTreePtr SplitCorePtr))
  , _expanderModuleTop :: !(Maybe DeclTreePtr)
  , _expanderModuleImports :: !Imports
  , _expanderModuleExports :: !Exports
  , _expanderPhaseRoots :: !(Map Phase Scope)
  , _expanderModuleRoots :: !(Map ModuleName Scope)
  , _expanderKernelBindings :: !BindingTable
  , _expanderKernelExports :: !Exports
  , _expanderKernelDatatypes :: !(Map Datatype DatatypeInfo)
  , _expanderKernelConstructors :: !(Map Constructor (ConstructorInfo Ty))
  , _expanderKernelValues :: !(Env Var (SchemePtr, Value))
  , _expanderDeclOutputScopes :: !(Map DeclOutputScopesPtr ScopeSet)
  , _expanderCurrentEnvs :: !(Map Phase (Env Var Value))
  , _expanderCurrentTransformerEnvs :: !(Map Phase (Env MacroVar Value))
  , _expanderCurrentDatatypes :: !(Map Phase (Map Datatype DatatypeInfo))
  , _expanderCurrentConstructors :: !(Map Phase (Map Constructor (ConstructorInfo Ty)))
  , _expanderCurrentBindingTable :: !BindingTable
  , _expanderExpressionTypes :: !(Map SplitCorePtr Ty)
  , _expanderCompletedSchemes :: !(Map SchemePtr (Scheme Ty))
  , _expanderTypeStore :: !(TypeStore Ty)
  , _expanderKindStore :: !KindStore
  , _expanderDefTypes :: !(TypeContext Var SchemePtr) -- ^ Module-level definitions
  }

These ``Maps`` are suspicious because every type suffixed with ``Ptr`` is a
newtype over an ``Integer``. For example, ``SplitCorePtr`` is an newtype over a
``Unique`` which is itself a newtype over ``Integer``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   newtype SplitCorePtr = SplitCorePtr Unique
     deriving (Eq, Ord)

.. code-block:: haskell

   newtype Unique = Unique Integer
     deriving (Data, Eq, Ord)

This means that ``klister`` has a lot of ``Maps`` effectively indexed on
``Integer``. Clearly an ``IntMap`` would be a better choice of data structure.
An ``IntMap`` has several advantages over ``Data.Map``. ``Data.Map`` is an
implementation of *size balanced binary trees* (see the `hackage
<https://hackage.haskell.org/package/containers-0.6.7/docs/Data-Map.html>`_
docs). These trees require re-balancing in order to maintain the balanced
invariant. This balancing slows down writes (that is, adds work to
``Data.Map.insert``) and consequently merges, because a merge of any two trees
may invoke a re-balancing. In contrast, ``IntMap`` is a big-endian PATRICIA Trie
(see :cite:t:`okasaki`) which never require balancing. Compared to ``Data.Map``,
an ``IntMap`` provides faster writes at the cost of slightly slower reads.
Additionally, ``IntMap`` uses less total memory than ``Data.Map`` [#]_.

The klister interpreter also uses ``Map``'s indexed over ``String`` like types.
For example, ``_expanderKernelDatatypes`` is a ``Map Datatype DatatypeInfo``,
where ``DataType`` is a record:

.. code-block:: haskell

   data Datatype
     = Datatype
       { _datatypeModule :: !ModuleName -- ^ The module that defines the datatype
       , _datatypeName :: !DatatypeName -- ^ The unique name for the datatype at this module and phase
       }
     deriving (Data, Eq, Ord, Show)


where ``ModuleName`` and ``DatatypeName`` are a ``String`` and ``Text``
respectively:

.. code-block:: haskell

   data ModuleName = ModuleName FilePath | KernelName KernelName
     deriving (Data, Eq, Ord, Show)

   newtype DatatypeName = DatatypeName { _datatypeNameText :: Text }
     deriving newtype (Eq, IsString, Ord, Show, Hashable)
     deriving stock Data

Indexing over ``Data.Map`` over ``String`` like types is a performance
anti-pattern. In the worse case, the ``Ord`` and ``Eq`` instance on ``String``
will need to check the entire ``String``. Even in the average case, the extra
comparisons will be required in order to rebalance the tree, which will slow
down writes and merges.

A better datastructure for maps indexed over ``String`` like types is
``Data.HashMap`` from the ``unordered-containers`` library. These maps are
*Hashed Array Mapped Trie's*, or HAMTs for short (see :cite:t:`BagwellHAMT`).
HAMTs index over a ``hash`` that uniquely represents the key. These data
structures are efficient for any key type where equality could be expensive;
such as ``String``, ``Text`` or inductive data types that derive ``Eq``.

Lazy Tuples
^^^^^^^^^^^

Consider this field of the ``ExpanderState``:

.. code-block:: haskell

  ...
  , _expanderTypePatternBinders :: !(Map.Map TypePatternPtr [(Scope, Ident, Var, SchemePtr)])
  ...

The elements of this map is a list of 4-tuples. This list will have an excessive
amount of indirection to its values. Not only will the interpreter be chasing
pointers in the elements of the list but it'll have to chase pointers for each
element of the tuple. This will be slow if these lists ever become large (over
~30 elements) and if this list will be the subject of folds. For this specific
datatype, there is one fold in the klister interpreter:

.. code-block:: haskell

   else do
     varInfo <- view (expanderTypePatternBinders . at patPtr) <$> getState
     case varInfo of
       Nothing -> throwError $ InternalError "Type pattern info not added"
       Just vars -> do
         p <- currentPhase
         let rhs' = foldr (addScope p) stx
                      [ sc'
                      | (sc', _, _, _) <- vars
                      ]
         withLocalVarTypes
           [ (var, varStx, t)
           | (_sc, varStx, var, t) <- vars
           ] $
           expandOneExpression ty dest rhs'

The code projects ``expanderTypePatternBinders`` and looks up the list that
``patPtr`` points to. It then iterates over that *same* list twice: First, to
project the ``sc'`` from the first position and pass it to ``addScope``. Second,
to project the second, third and fourth positions into a list of 3-tuples and
pass that to ``withLocalVarTypes``. This code can be improved with :term:`Loop
Fusion` to iterate over the list once, using ``foldl'`` instead of ``foldr``,
and by defining a datatype which unpacks every field instead of using ``(,,,)``
to avoid the extra allocation for these tuples. Note that defining a such a
datatype will require that |bottom| is never an element of the 4-tuple. In this
case that will be true, but it is not true in general; again, in order to
optimize you must :ref:`understand the system <Understand the System>`.

Generally types such as ``(,,,)`` are a path of least resistance when writing
new code. They are easy to reach for, easy to write and don't require more
domain modeling. However, tuples, and especially tuples with more than two
fields, are a consistent source of memory leaks. So one is almost always better
off defining a datatype instead of using a tuple for performance.

.. note::

   Of course, you may not want to add yet another datatype to the
   implementation. One may want the datatypes in the implementation to map
   cleanly to domain objects. This a classic tradeoff between performance,
   readability and maintainability.

Running the testsuite
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Klister does not have a benchmark suite, but does have a testsuite (with 124
tests) written in :ref:`tasty <Tasty Chapter>` which outputs the wall time of
each test. So let's run the testsuite to find a degenerate test:


.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --test-show-details=streaming  --ghc-options='-O2'

     Test suite klister-tests: RUNNING...
     All tests
       Expander tests
         ...
         Module tests
           Expected to succeed
             ...
             examples/lang.kl:                              OK (0.04s)
             examples/import.kl:                            OK (0.02s)
             examples/macro-body-shift.kl:                  OK (0.03s)
             examples/test-quasiquote.kl:                   OK (0.05s)
             examples/quasiquote-syntax-test.kl:            OK (0.04s)
             examples/hygiene.kl:                           OK (0.84s)
             examples/defun-test.kl:                        OK (0.01s)
             examples/fun-exports-test.kl:                  OK (0.04s)
       Golden tests
         test-quasiquote:                                   OK (0.03s)
         io:                                                OK (0.03s)
         defun-test:                                        OK (0.04s)
         contract:                                          OK (0.11s)
         int-ops:                                           OK (0.03s)
         implicit-conversion:                               OK (7.02s)
         ...
         implicit-conversion-test:                          OK (9.89s)
         higher-kinded-patterns:                            OK (1.80s)
         custom-literals-test:                              OK (0.46s)
         double-define:                                     OK (0.34s)
         custom-module-test:                                OK (0.55s)
         which-problem:                                     OK (0.82s)
         incorrect-context:                                 OK (0.03s)
         bound-vs-free:                                     OK (0.31s)
         meta-macro:                                        OK (0.11s)
         integer-syntax:                                    OK (0.04s)
         import:                                            OK (0.04s)

         All 124 tests passed (38.15s)
         Test suite klister-tests: PASS

The entire testsuite finishes in 38 seconds. Notice that both
``implicit-conversion`` and ``implicit-conversion-test`` are extreme outliers,
passing in 7 and 9 *seconds*, whereas each other test passes in well under a
second (except ``higher-kinded-patterns``). We have found our degenerate
program.


Restate the Problem
-------------------

For the rest of the case study we'll focus on speeding up
``implicit-conversion-test`` under the assumption that our changes will also
speed up the other tests and consequently the entire interpreter. It is
certainly possible that optimizations in one subsystem of your code base will
not translate to better overall performance. We make this assumption because
this is the first pass of performance engineering for this code. So the
probability that our changes do impact overall performance is high.

We have identified a list of likely issues, but before we begin to change things
we need to make sure that the problems we've identified are indeed problems. Or
in other words, we should only make changes *once* we have evidence that the
code we're changing is problematic. If the maps are a problematic factor then we
should expect a lot of allocations to come from ``Data.Map.insert``, ``Eq`` and
``Ord`` instance methods, and the functions ``Data.Map.Internal.balanceR`` and
``Data.Map.Internal.balanceL``. This is a good opportunity to :ref:`not think
and look <Don't think, look>` with a :ref:`ticky <Ticky Chapter>` report.

First we'll generate a ticky report for the entire testsuite:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --test-show-details=streaming --test-options='+RTS -rticky -RTS' --ghc-options='-rtsopts -ticky -ticky-allocd -ticky-dyn-thunk'
     Build profile: -w ghc-9.2.4 -O1
     ...

and check the results sorted by allocations. As a reminder, there are 5 columns
in a ticky report. The first column is entries. The second column is the number
of bytes allocated *by* the code for the closure. The third column is the number
of bytes *addressed* to each closure. The fourth column classifies the closure
by type with a shorthand notation, and the last column displays the names of the
|stg| closure the ticky profile is describing:

.. code-block::

   $ cat ticky | tail -n +20 | sort -k2 -nr | less

     53739709 4299176720          0   3 +.>                  ScopeSet.$wallScopeSets'{v rNAX} (fun)
     60292448 3858716672 2149588360   3 +..                  sat_sOYl{v} (ScopeSet) (fun) in rNAX
     81547057 1368797696          0   4 SISM                 ScopeSet.$w$sgo4{v rNAW} (fun)
     57730804 1305110352          0   4 SISM                 ScopeSet.$w$sgo1{v rNAV} (fun)
     61143424  841913088          0   2 SM                   ScopeSet.isSubsetOf_go15{v rOUK} (fun)
      7819243  815587232          0   6 >pii.M               Binding.$w$sgo3{v r1syq} (fun)
     17961626  421056776          0   3 >MM                  Binding.$fMonoidBindingTable_$sunionWith{v r1syc} (fun)
       867831  366262720          0  10 piiSiSL>>>           Parser.Common.$wg{v rk} (fun)
       886661  333384536          0   6 SS>>>>               located{v r1b6H} (Parser) (fun)
      4552387  298031744          0   3 ISM                  Expander.$w$sgo4{v r5BKT} (fun)
      4843152  270145008     612288   1 M                    go15{v s1szA} (Binding) (fun) in r1syd
      2699373  259139808          0   4 >SSM                 Syntax.$w$cmapScopes{v rTEZ} (fun)
     18445979  240603872          0   4 piiM                 Binding.$w$sgo1{v r1syi} (fun)
      1351616  237884416     612288   1 T                    f{v s1szf} (Binding) (fun) in r1syd
      1862523  211065056          0   3 S>M                  ScopeSet.$satKeyIdentity_$sgo15{v rOUv} (fun)
      3383994  186416288   43447360   2 LM                   go15{v sP96} (ScopeSet) (fun) in rOUk
       101588  145802400          0   4 MSSM                 $wexpandOneForm{v r5IwM} (Expander) (fun)
      2607448  125157504          0   2 >S                   Syntax.$fHasScopesSyntax_$cmapScopes{v rTEY} (fun)
     ...

There are several interesting aspects to this ticky profile snippet. First, the
most allocating code is ``ScopeSet.allScopeSets'``, it is allocating a
dictionary (``+``) of some type (``.``) and function (``>``). Observing a
function call to a dictionary ``+`` in a ticky report can often mean that a
function did not specialize. So from this ticky we suspect that
``allScopeSets'`` has not specialized. The second most allocating closure is a
SAT'd function ``sat_sOYl`` (see :ref:`The Static Argument Transformation <SAT
Chapter>`). From its description: ``{v} (ScopeSet) (fun) in rNAX``, we can see
that it is a non-exported name (``{v}``) just like ``allScopeSets'``, in the
``(ScopeSet)`` module. It is a function ``(fun)`` and is a local function in the
``rNAX`` closure. The ``rNAX`` closure is the |stg| name of the closure for
``allScopeSets'`` as shown in description for ``allScopeSets'``. So the two most
allocating function calls in the interpreter, when running the testsuite, are
due to ``allScopeSets``. Clearly, ``allScopeSets`` is a good target for
performance engineering.

We also see that the 5th and 6th most allocating functions called are
``ScopeSet.isSubsetOf`` and ``Binding.$fMonoidBindingTable_$unionWith``. That
suggests peculiar usage pattern; ``isSubsetOf`` should only return a ``Bool``
which should not be an allocating function call. ``unionWith`` should be
allocating, but that this occurs in the ``Monoid Binding`` instance means that
the ``Binding Monoid`` instance is heavily allocating. Let's check these
functions in the source code:

.. code-block:: haskell

   data ScopeSet = ScopeSet
     { _universalScopes :: Set Scope
     , _phaseScopes :: Map Phase (Set Scope)
     }


   data Scope = Scope { scopeNum :: Int, scopePurpose :: Text }
     deriving (Data, Eq, Ord, Show)

   newtype Phase = Phase { phaseNum :: Natural }
     deriving (Data, Eq, Ord, Show)

   isSubsetOf :: Phase -> ScopeSet -> ScopeSet -> Bool
   isSubsetOf p scs1 scs2 =
     Set.isSubsetOf (scopes p scs1) (scopes p scs2)


   scopes :: Phase -> ScopeSet -> Set Scope
   scopes p scs = view universalScopes scs `Set.union`
                  view (phaseScopes . at p . non Set.empty) scs


``ScopeSet`` is a record of ``Data.Set Scope`` and ``Data.Map`` indexed by
``Phase`` that holds ``Set Scope``. Furthermore, both ``Scope`` and ``Phase``
are Integer-like. So we have an implementation that could use ``IntMap`` and
``IntSet`` instead of ``Data.Map`` and ``Data.Set``.

We know that ``isSubsetOf`` does a lot of allocation. Now we can see where this
allocation is happening. ``isSubsetOf`` checks that ``scs1`` is a subset of
``scs2`` by calling ``Set.isSubsetOf`` on the result of the ``scopes`` function.
``scopes`` is allocating a new ``Set Scope`` from the ``ScopeSet`` via
``Set.union``, then using the results of a lookup on the ``phaseScopes`` Map,
then merging two ``Set``'s just to check the subset.

There are several ways to improve the memory performance of this function.
First, we can employ better data structures. We know that this code is
performing a lot of merges, so we should expect an improvement in both time and
memory performance by using an ``IntMap`` and ``IntSet`` because these data
structures provide more efficient merges than ``Data.Set`` and ``Data.Map``.
Second, we can use a better algorithm. From the ticky, ``isSubSetOf`` was called
61143424 times. As written, this code will perform its lookups and unions *each*
time, even if we have a duplicate call. So this seems to be a good candidate for
memoization or caching the calls to ``isSubsetOf``. We could also avoid building
the intermediate ``Set`` in the ``scopes`` function by checking for a subset
without merging ``universalScopes`` and ``phaseScopes``.

The second interesting function was ``unionWith`` in the ``Monoid Binding``
instance. Here is the source code:

.. code-block:: haskell

   newtype BindingTable = BindingTable { _bindings :: Map Text [(ScopeSet, Binding, BindingInfo SrcLoc)] }
     deriving (Data, Show)

   instance Semigroup BindingTable where
     b1 <> b2 = BindingTable $ Map.unionWith (<>) (view bindings b1) (view bindings b2)

   instance Monoid BindingTable where
     mempty = BindingTable Map.empty

A ``BindingTable`` is a ``Map`` keyed on ``Text`` that holds a list of triples.
The ``Semigroup`` instance is the origin of the ``unionWith`` in the ticky
profile because ``Monoid.mappend`` defaults to the Semigroup definition. This
type is likely too lazy. ``Data.Map`` keyed on ``Text`` relies on the ``Ord``
and ``Eq`` instances of ``Text`` for most of its operations. In the worst case
this means the runtime system has to compare the entire ``Text`` key, which
could be slow when the ``Text`` is large. Another problem is the use of a list.
A list is only an appropriate data structure if it is used like a stack or if it
is used as a store that is eventually traversed and consumed. Once one finds
themselves performing lookups or merges on a list, it is time to use a different
data structure. The last problem is the 3-tuple which we have already covered
above.

To improve the performance of the ``BindingTable`` we'll use a ``HashMap``. This
should yield better merge performance, and faster writes and reads. However,
this may not fix the root cause of the allocations. So we'll rerun the ticky
report after making the changes to test that we have indeed addressed the
problem.

Optimization 1: Better Data Structures: Maps
--------------------------------------------

We've removed all uses of ``Data.Map`` and replaced them with either a
``HashMap`` or an ``IntMap``. After the changes ``ExpanderState`` now looks
like:

.. code-block:: haskell

  data ExpanderState = ExpanderState
  { _expanderWorld              :: !(World Value)
  , _expanderNextScopeNum       :: !Int
  , _expanderGlobalBindingTable :: !BindingTable
  , _expanderExpansionEnv       :: !ExpansionEnv
  , _expanderTasks              :: [(TaskID, ExpanderLocal, ExpanderTask)]
  , _expanderOriginLocations    :: !(Store SplitCorePtr SrcLoc)
  , _expanderCompletedCore      :: !(Store SplitCorePtr (CoreF TypePatternPtr PatternPtr SplitCorePtr))
  , _expanderCompletedPatterns  :: !(Store PatternPtr (ConstructorPatternF PatternPtr))
  , _expanderCompletedTypePatterns :: !(Store TypePatternPtr TypePattern)
  , _expanderPatternBinders     :: !(Store PatternPtr (Either [PatternPtr] (Scope, Ident, Var, SchemePtr)))
  , _expanderTypePatternBinders :: !(Store TypePatternPtr [(Scope, Ident, Var, SchemePtr)])
  , _expanderCompletedTypes     :: !(Store SplitTypePtr (TyF SplitTypePtr))
  , _expanderCompletedDeclTrees :: !(Store DeclTreePtr (DeclTreeF DeclPtr DeclTreePtr))
  , _expanderCompletedDecls     :: !(Store DeclPtr (Decl SplitTypePtr SchemePtr DeclTreePtr SplitCorePtr))
  , _expanderModuleTop          :: !(Maybe DeclTreePtr)
  , _expanderModuleImports      :: !Imports
  , _expanderModuleExports      :: !Exports
  , _expanderPhaseRoots         :: !(Store Phase Scope)
  , _expanderModuleRoots        :: !(HashMap ModuleName Scope)
  , _expanderKernelBindings     :: !BindingTable
  , _expanderKernelExports      :: !Exports
  , _expanderKernelDatatypes    :: !(HashMap Datatype DatatypeInfo)
  , _expanderKernelConstructors :: !(HashMap Constructor (ConstructorInfo Ty))
  , _expanderKernelValues       :: !(Env Var (SchemePtr, Value))
  , _expanderDeclOutputScopes   :: !(Store DeclOutputScopesPtr ScopeSet)
  , _expanderCurrentEnvs        :: !(Store Phase (Env Var Value))
  , _expanderCurrentTransformerEnvs :: !(Store Phase (Env MacroVar Value))
  , _expanderCurrentDatatypes   :: !(Store Phase (HashMap Datatype DatatypeInfo))
  , _expanderCurrentConstructors :: !(Store Phase (HashMap Constructor (ConstructorInfo Ty)))
  , _expanderCurrentBindingTable :: !BindingTable
  , _expanderExpressionTypes    :: !(Store SplitCorePtr Ty)
  , _expanderCompletedSchemes   :: !(Store SchemePtr (Scheme Ty))
  , _expanderTypeStore          :: !(TypeStore Ty)
  , _expanderKindStore          :: !KindStore
  , _expanderDefTypes           :: !(TypeContext Var SchemePtr) -- ^ Module-level definitions
  }

where a ``Store k v`` is newtype over an ``IntMap`` with some type level
handling for keys:

.. code-block:: haskell

   -- new module Util.Store
   newtype Store p v = Store { unStore :: IntMap v}
     deriving newtype (Eq, Ord, Show, Semigroup, Monoid, Functor, Foldable)
     deriving stock   Data
   type role Store representational _

   -- | Tiny module to wrap operations for IntMaps

   module Util.Key
     (HasKey(..)
     ) where

   class HasKey a where
     getKey :: a -> Int
     fromKey :: Int -> a

The ``HasKey`` class is crucial for preserving type safety so that we do not
accidentally merge a ``Store k v`` and a ``Store p v`` when ``p`` is not equal
to ``k``. It also allows us to provide functions such as ``mapKeys`` with a
polymorphic type on the ``Key``, as opposed to the monomorphic type in
``Data.IntMap``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   mapKeys :: HasKey p => (p -> p) -> Store p v -> Store p v
   mapKeys f s = Store $! IM.mapKeys (getKey . f . fromKey) (unStore s)

.. note::

   I've purposefully taken the opportunity to create the abstraction boundary
   ``Store p v``, which is unnecessary from a performance perspective. But by
   having an abstraction boundary the system becomes easier to change. For
   example, we can now alter the implementation of ``Store p v`` *without* a lot
   of code churn occurring in the interpreter. The key point is that if a
   subsystem is easy to change, then it is also easy to experiment and engineer,
   because the cost of experimentation is reduced. So while performance and
   modularity are often in tension, in this case, modularity enables easier and
   cheaper (in terms of engineering time) performance engineering.

now let's check the ticky:

.. code-block::

   $ cat ticky | tail -n +20 | sort -k2 -nr | less

     53996388 4319711040          0   3 +.>                  ScopeSet.$wallScopeSets'{v rP2F} (fun)
     60490404 3871385856 2159855520   3 +..                  sat_sQ5D{v} (ScopeSet) (fun) in rP2F
     20257037 1487236040          0   3 iMM                  Binding.$wgo{v r1ric} (fun)
     81547057 1368797696          0   4 SISM                 ScopeSet.$w$sgo4{v rP2E} (fun)
     57730804 1305110352          0   4 SISM                 ScopeSet.$w$sgo1{v rP2D} (fun)
       867831  366262720          0  10 piiSiSL>>>           Parser.Common.$wg{v r3zJ} (fun)
       886661  333384536          0   6 SS>>>>               located{v r1art} (Parser) (fun)
     10521949  330656896          0   3 Lii                  ModuleName.$wgo1{v roEi} (fun)
      4552387  298031744          0   3 ISM                  Expander.$w$sgo4{v r5On7} (fun)
      2699373  259139808          0   4 >SSM                 Syntax.$w$cmapScopes{v rUeh} (fun)
      1351616  237884416     612288   1 T                    f{v s1sRr} (Binding) (fun) in r1rif
      3159635  193376496    1071504   1 M                    go{v s1sS8} (Binding) (fun) in r1rif
      2348710  169685264    1156288   1 M                    go2{v s16Wz} (Env) (fun) in r16zL
      4590545  146897440  183644160   0                      f2{v s1t5Z} (Binding) (thk) in r1ric
       101588  145802400          0   4 MSSM                 $wexpandOneForm{v r5VBM} (Expander) (fun)
      2607448  125157504          0   2 >S                   Syntax.$fHasScopesSyntax_$cmapScopes{v rUeg} (fun)
      1357729  119480152     486976   1 S                    sat_s5YKN{v} (Expander) (fun) in s5YKB
       144974  118076280          0  10 piiiSL>>>>           $wm2{v r1arF} (Parser) (fun)

Notice that the entries to ``unionWith`` and ``isSubsetOf`` have disappeared.
``isSubsetOf`` is still in the ticky report but is now shown as non-allocating:

.. code-block:: console

   ...
   38279681          0          0   2 MM                   ScopeSet.$sisSubsetOf_$sisSubsetOfX{v rP2u} (fun)
   ...

Which is strange. We should expect it to be allocating, although allocating a
lot less. We are likely observing some new optimization GHC is applying. In any
case, its a good sign. We've demonstrated progress with the ticky report. Now
let's verify that these changes propagate to the ``implicit-conversion`` test.

.. code-block:: console

   Test suite klister-tests: RUNNING...
   All tests
     Expander tests
     ...
       Module tests
         Expected to succeed
         ...
           examples/lang.kl:                              OK (0.04s)
           examples/import.kl:                            OK (0.03s)
           examples/macro-body-shift.kl:                  OK (0.04s)
           examples/test-quasiquote.kl:                   OK (0.04s)
           examples/quasiquote-syntax-test.kl:            OK (0.03s)
           examples/hygiene.kl:                           OK (0.66s)
           examples/defun-test.kl:                        OK (0.03s)
           examples/fun-exports-test.kl:                  OK (0.04s)
     Golden tests
       test-quasiquote:                                   OK (0.04s)
       io:                                                OK (0.03s)
       defun-test:                                        OK (0.03s)
       contract:                                          OK (0.08s)
       int-ops:                                           OK (0.05s)
       implicit-conversion:                               OK (10.42s)
       ...
       implicit-conversion-test:                          OK (13.55s)
       higher-kinded-patterns:                            OK (0.77s)
       custom-literals-test:                              OK (0.38s)
       double-define:                                     OK (0.28s)
       custom-module-test:                                OK (0.33s)
       which-problem:                                     OK (0.53s)
       incorrect-context:                                 OK (0.03s)
       bound-vs-free:                                     OK (0.25s)
       meta-macro:                                        OK (0.10s)
       integer-syntax:                                    OK (0.04s)
       import:                                            OK (0.03s)

Performance has degraded even though the ticky report showed an improvement!
That we do not observe any difference in wall time *after* fixing the 5th and
6th most allocating function calls is contrary to what we should expect; even if
the total allocations of these functions are one order of magnitude less than
``allScopeSets``. The ``Data.Map`` performance costs must have been eclipsed by
some other issue. Let's generate a heap profile to see what's going on in the
heap.

Optimization 2: A Memory Leak Casts a Long Shadow
-------------------------------------------------

To continue engineering the interpreter we need to be able to observe the
effects of any change we make. Unfortunately, the memory leak we discovered in
the last section was so large it eclipsed the effect of our changes. Clearly we
need to fix this leak in order to continue to optimize. To tackle this memory
leak, we'll use eventlog and eventlog2html to observe the heap only on
``implicit-conversion-test``. To begin we'll inspect the types that were
allocated on the heap by passing ``-hy``:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --test-show-details=streaming  --test-options='--pattern "implicit-conversion-test" +RTS -hy -l-agu -p -RTS' --ghc-options='-eventlog -rtsopts -O2'

which produces:

.. raw:: html

         <iframe id="scaled-frame" scrolling="no" src="../../_static/klister/klister-eventlog-implicit-conversion-hy.html"></iframe>

We see that the heap is growing to over 2.8Gb of lists for just one test!
Crucially the shape of this profile is not indicative of a memory leak. A
typical memory leak should look like a pyramid because the program builds up
thunks and then forces them all in relatively short time. What we observe in
this profile is allocations of lists that *never decrease*. Now that we know the
type to look for, we can correlate this type to a subsystem in the interpreter.
To do so we'll run another heap profile, but break down the heap by module (by
using ``-hm`` instead of ``-hy``):

.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --test-show-details=streaming  --test-options='--pattern "implicit-conversion-test" +RTS -hm -l-agu -p -RTS' --ghc-options='-eventlog -rtsopts -O2'

.. raw:: html

         <iframe id="scaled-frame" scrolling="no" src="../../_static/klister/klister-eventlog-implicit-conversion-hm.html"></iframe>

We see that these lists are coming from ``Expander.Monad``. This is suspicious.
We have data being consistently allocated in essentially the state type of a
subsystem. That certainly sounds like a memory leak. Before we can conclude that
the expander has a memory leak we need to know why this data is retained at all.
This is a good scenario to use :userGuide:`Biographical Profiling
<profiling.html#biographical-profiling>` because we want to know: (1) the state
of these objects on the heap and (2) why they are not being collected, that is,
why is GHC's runtime system keeping them alive. For (1) we'll do a biographical
profile and for (2) a retainer profile.

Here's the biographical profile:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --test-show-details=streaming  --test-options='--pattern "implicit-conversion-test" +RTS -hb -l-agu -p -RTS' --ghc-options='-eventlog -rtsopts -O2'

.. raw:: html

         <iframe id="scaled-frame" scrolling="no" src="../../_static/klister/klister-eventlog-implicit-conversion-hb.html"></iframe>

Void! The lists are in a ``void`` state meaning these objects are allocated *but
are never used* (see :userGuide:`the user guide
<profiling.html#biographical-profiling>`). Now we can restate the problem: There
is a memory leak in the ``Expander``. When ``implicit-conversion-test`` is run,
the expander allocates a total of 121.8 Gb. (eventlog shows 116171.68
*MebiBytes* in the detailed tab).

Now to answer why this data is being retained. Here is the retainer profile.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --enable-profiling --test-show-details=streaming --test-options='--pattern "implicit-conversion-test" +RTS -hr -l-agu -p -RTS' --ghc-options='-eventlog -rtsopts -O2'
   $ hp2ps -c klister-tests.hp && ps2pdf klister-tests.ps

.. note::

   Eventlog threw an exception for this retainer profile. So I've resorted to
   use the classic tools: ``hp2ps`` and ``ps2pdf`` to render the profile.

.. image:: /_static/klister/klister-eventlog-implicit-conversion-hr.png
   :width: 800

The retainer profile clearly shows that ``currentEnv`` is keeping this data
alive and has the distinguishing profile of a memory leak. Let's look at that
function:

.. code-block:: haskell

   -- in Expander.Monad

   currentEnv :: Expand VEnv
   currentEnv = do
     phase <- currentPhase
     globalEnv <- fromMaybe mempty . view (expanderWorld . worldEnvironments . at phase) <$> getState
     localEnv  <- fromMaybe mempty . view (expanderCurrentEnvs . at phase) <$> getState
     return $ globalEnv <> localEnv

This code is reading from the ``Expander`` state twice to retrieve ``globalEnv``
and ``localEnv``, and then returning the union of these two environments. Notice
that if the results of ``currentEnv`` are not immediately forced, then the
projections and the return will be lazy. Thus, this code will allocate a thunk
for ``phase``, ``globalEnv``, ``localEnv`` and the merge of both ``globalEnv``
and ``localEnv``. In general, unless the result of a monadic action *needs* to
be consumed lazily there is little reason to not make it strict in the return.
In this case, there are two call sites to ``currentEnv`` both in the expander:

.. code-block:: haskell

   -- Expander.hs
   runTask :: (TaskID, ExpanderLocal, ExpanderTask) -> Expand ()
   runTask (tid, localData, task) = withLocal localData $ do
   ...
    AwaitingDefn x n b defn t dest stx ->
      Env.lookupVal x <$> currentEnv >>=
      \case


   evalDecl :: CompleteDecl -> WriterT [EvalResult] Expand ()
   evalDecl (CompleteDecl d) =
     case d of
     ...
     Example loc sch expr -> do
      env <- lift currentEnv
      value <- lift $ expandEval (eval expr)
      tell $ [ExampleResult loc env expr sch value]

The first call site in ``runTask`` is immediately scrutinized by the ``\case``
and ``Env.lookupVal``. However, the second is not: ``ExampleResult`` is not
strict in any fields:

.. code-block:: haskell

   data EvalResult
     = ExampleResult SrcLoc VEnv Core (Scheme Ty) Value
     | IOResult (IO ())

and the whole computation is performed in a lazy ``WriterT`` monad transformer.
Before changing the code, let's first inspect the type of the ``Expand`` monad.
Here is the definition for ``Expand``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   newtype Expand a = Expand
     { runExpand :: ReaderT ExpanderContext (ExceptT ExpansionErr IO) a
     }
     deriving (Functor, Applicative, Monad, MonadError ExpansionErr, MonadIO, MonadReader ExpanderContext)

   data ExpanderContext = ExpanderContext
     { _expanderLocal :: !ExpanderLocal
     , _expanderState :: IORef ExpanderState
     }

Where ``ExpanderState`` was shown above. So we have a classic `ReaderT over IO
<https://www.fpcomplete.com/blog/2017/06/readert-design-pattern/>`_ pattern.
Meaning that the laziness of any state updates depend on the strictness of
functions operating on ``ExpanderContext``. Next let's check the types of
``globalEnv`` and ``localEnv``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   -- in Expander.Monad.hs
   type VEnv = Env Var Value

   -- in Env.hs
   newtype Env v a = Env (IntMap (Ident, a))
     deriving newtype (Eq, Monoid, Semigroup, Show)
     deriving stock Functor

   -- in World.hs

   data World a = World
     { _worldEnvironments :: !(Store Phase (Env Var a))
     , _worldTypeContexts :: !(TypeContext Var SchemePtr)
     , _worldTransformerEnvironments :: !(Store Phase (Env MacroVar a))
     , _worldModules      :: !(HashMap ModuleName CompleteModule)
     , _worldVisited      :: !(HashMap ModuleName (Set Phase))
     , _worldExports      :: !(HashMap ModuleName Exports)
     , _worldEvaluated    :: !(HashMap ModuleName [EvalResult])
     , _worldDatatypes    :: !(Store Phase (HashMap Datatype DatatypeInfo))
     , _worldConstructors :: !(Store Phase (HashMap Constructor (ConstructorInfo Ty)))
     , _worldLocation     :: FilePath
     }

``currentEnv`` returns a ``Expand VEnv``, ``VEnv`` is a ``Env Var Value`` where
an ``Env`` is an ``IntMap``. Thus ``globalEnv`` and ``localEnv`` are both a
strict ``IntMap`` that stores a tuple of ``(Ident, Value)``. Here is the type of
``Value``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   -- in Value.hs
   data Value
     = ValueClosure Closure
     | ValueSyntax Syntax
     | ValueMacroAction MacroAction
     | ValueIOAction (IO Value)
     | ValueOutputPort Handle
     | ValueInteger Integer
     | ValueCtor Constructor [Value]
     | ValueType Ty
     | ValueString Text

Notice that ``ValueCtor`` holds a lazy list of ``Value``. Should
``implicit-tests`` create many ``ValueCtor`` then the expander state will leak
memory in ``Value``. This leak will occur even though the ``IntMap`` is strict.
The strict ``IntMap`` well only evaluate elements to :term:`WHNF`, which will be
``(,)``, thus because ``Value`` is stored in a lazy tuple, the fields of the
tuple will be lazy unless they are carefully forced *before* insertion.

Let's test this and make ``Value`` strict and then generate another
biographical profile to observe the change:

.. code-block:: haskell

   -- in Value.hs
   data Value
     = ValueClosure !Closure
     | ValueSyntax  !Syntax
     | ValueMacroAction !MacroAction
     | ValueIOAction   !(IO Value)
     | ValueOutputPort !Handle
     | ValueInteger    !Integer
     | ValueCtor    !Constructor ![Value]
     | ValueType    !Ty
     | ValueString  !Text

.. raw:: html

         <iframe id="scaled-frame" scrolling="no"
         src="../../_static/klister/klister-eventlog-implicit-conversion-strict-value.html"></iframe>

Unfortunately, the change made no difference. We'll revert the change and try
making the monadic action strict in its return:

.. code-block:: haskell

   -- in Expander.Monad

   currentEnv :: Expand VEnv
   currentEnv = do
     phase <- currentPhase
     globalEnv <- fromMaybe mempty . view (expanderWorld . worldEnvironments . at phase) <$> getState
     localEnv  <- fromMaybe mempty . view (expanderCurrentEnvs . at phase) <$> getState
     return $! globalEnv <> localEnv

Notice the strict application: ``$!``. This change results in this profile:


.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --test-show-details=streaming  --test-options='--pattern "implicit-conversion-test" +RTS -hb -l-agu -p -RTS' --ghc-options='-eventlog -rtsopts -O2'

.. raw:: html

         <iframe id="scaled-frame" scrolling="no" src="../../_static/klister/klister-eventlog-implicit-conversion-currentEnv-fixed.html"></iframe>

A significant improvement! Instead of 121.8 Gb the profile shows total
allocation of ``void`` of 4.62 Gb (4404.22 MiB in the detailed tab) which is a
30x reduction.


Optimization 3: Choosing Better Data Structures: Lists
------------------------------------------------------

We closed a major memory leak, and have made the implementation of the expander
more efficient, but there is yet more low hanging fruit. Consider this
definition of the ``BindingTable``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   newtype BindingTable = BindingTable { _bindings :: HashMap Text [(ScopeSet, Binding, BindingInfo SrcLoc)] }
     deriving (Data, Show)

The ``BindingTable`` is a ``HashMap`` keyed on ``Text`` that holds a list of
3-tuples. Let's observe how this list is used in the system:

.. code-block:: haskell

   visibleBindings :: Expand BindingTable
   visibleBindings = do
     globals <- view expanderGlobalBindingTable <$> getState
     locals <- view expanderCurrentBindingTable <$> getState
     return (globals <> locals)

This ``visibleBindings`` function projects two ``BindingTable``'s from the
``ExpanderState`` and then merges them. This function is then called by
``resolve``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   resolve :: Ident -> Expand Binding
   resolve stx@(Stx scs srcLoc x) = do
     p <- currentPhase
     bs <- allMatchingBindings x scs
     case bs of
       [] ->
         throwError (Unknown (Stx scs srcLoc x))
       candidates ->
         let best = maximumOn (ScopeSet.size p . fst) candidates
         in checkUnambiguous (fst best) (map fst candidates) stx *>
            return (snd best)

In ``resolve`` the ``BindingTable`` is checked to be empty, if its not empty
then the table is traversed for the maximum by scopeset. Then the maximum
element and the rest of the scopesets are passed to ``checkUnambiguous``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   checkUnambiguous :: ScopeSet -> [ScopeSet] -> Ident -> Expand ()
   checkUnambiguous best candidates blame =
     do p <- currentPhase
        let bestSize = ScopeSet.size p best
        let candidateSizes = map (ScopeSet.size p) (nub candidates)
        if length (filter (== bestSize) candidateSizes) > 1
          then throwError (Ambiguous p blame candidates)
          else return ()

In ``checkUnambiguous`` the ``candidates`` list is pruned of any duplicates,
filtered, and its length is calculated to determine an error state.

Finally, in the ``visit`` the ``BindingTable`` (``bs``) is projected from the
module being visited and then merged with the interpreter's binding table:

.. code-block:: haskell

   visit :: ModuleName -> Expand Exports
   visit modName = do
   ...
       let bs = getModuleBindings m''
       modifyState $ over expanderGlobalBindingTable $ (<> bs)
     return (shift i es)
     where getModuleBindings (Expanded _ bs) = bs
           getModuleBindings (KernelModule _) = mempty

So from this code, the ``BindingTable`` data structure undergoes merges,
traversals such as ``fmap`` and ``filter`` and the length is calculated. We can
check how often these functions are used in the ``prof`` report we generated
with the last heap profile (using the ``-p`` RTS flag). ``visibleBindings`` and
``resolve`` are entered more than 100,000 times, ``checkUnambiguous`` is entered
less than 20,000 times. Thus merging and sorting are more important than
duplicate element removal and calculating length. Based on this usage, we'll
replace the list with a ``Data.Sequence``, a ``Data.Set`` would also work and
would provide uniqueness by default, but ``Data.Set`` has slower merge behavior
compared to a ``Data.Sequence`` for many elements
(:math:`\mathcal{O}(\log{(\min(n_{1},n_{2}))})`, compared to
:math:`\mathcal{O}(m \log{\frac{n + 1}{m + 1}})`, where :math:`m \le n`).

``BindingTable`` is not the only suspicious list. Consider this list in the
definition of ``Module``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   data Module f a = Module
     { _moduleName :: ModuleName
     , _moduleImports :: !Imports
     , _moduleBody :: f a
     , _moduleExports :: !Exports
     }
     deriving (Data, Functor, Show)

    data CompleteModule
     = Expanded !(Module [] CompleteDecl) !BindingTable
     | KernelModule !Phase
     deriving (Data, Show)

This list is passed to ``Module`` as a type argument. But is used in this code
in the expander monad:

.. code-block:: haskell

   getDeclGroup :: DeclTreePtr -> Expand [CompleteDecl]
   getDeclGroup ptr =
     (view (expanderCompletedDeclTrees . at ptr) <$> getState) >>=
     \case
       Nothing -> throwError $ InternalError "Incomplete module after expansion"
       Just DeclTreeLeaf -> pure []
       Just (DeclTreeAtom decl) ->
         (:[]) <$> getDecl decl
       Just (DeclTreeBranch l r) ->
         (++) <$> getDeclGroup l <*> getDeclGroup r

Notice that the ``DeclTreeBranch l r`` case will be expensive because it will
merge *every combination* of elements in the ``l`` and ``r`` groups with list
concatenation. Just this line is enough to change the data structure to a
sequence, again because a sequence has fast merging and cons behavior [#]_.

Optimization 4: Fixing allScopeSets
-----------------------------------

We,ve come quite far, but there is still a lot of ``void`` in the heap profile.
This is a good scenario for info-table profiling. Info-table profiling relates
source code to closures so we can see the exact line of source code the ``void``
is originating.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --test-show-details=streaming --test-options='--pattern "implicit-conversion-test" +RTS -hi -i0.05 -l -RTS' --ghc-options='-eventlog -rtsopts -O2 -finfo-table-map -fdistinct-constructor-tables'

and the profile is rendered in eventlog:

.. raw:: html

         <iframe id="scaled-frame" scrolling="no" src="../../_static/klister/klister-eventlog-implicit-conversion-ipe-allscopeset.html"></iframe>

Notice that the legend displays the :term:`Info Table Address` instead of the
closure type, module, or biography. From the profile we find that ``0x7c41d0``
and ``0xc0c330`` are responsible for the ``void`` allocation. The detailed tab
maps these addresses directly to source code. In the detailed tab, we see that
``0x7c41d0`` has the description ``sat_sN17_info``, the closure type ``THUNK``,
the type ``f a``, and is in the module ``ScopeSet`` at line 146. That line is
exactly the local ``combine`` function in ``allScopeSets``. Recall that we also
observed ``allScopeSets`` doing the most allocation in addition to having a high
degree of entries in the ticky profile above. It therefore seems crucial to
optimize the function. Here is the source code:

.. code-block:: haskell

   allScopeSets :: Data d => Traversal' d ScopeSet
   allScopeSets = allScopeSets'
     where
       allScopeSets' :: forall f d. (Applicative f, Data d)
                     => (ScopeSet -> f ScopeSet)
                     -> d -> f d
       allScopeSets' f = gmapA go
         where
           go :: forall a. Data a => a -> f a
           go a = case eqT @a @ScopeSet of
             Just Refl -> f a
             Nothing -> allScopeSets' f a

       -- A variant of Data.Data.gmapM which uses Applicative instead of Monad
       gmapA :: forall f d. (Applicative f, Data d)
             => (forall x. Data x => x -> f x)
             -> d -> f d
       gmapA g = gfoldl combine pure
         where
           combine :: Data a => f (a -> b) -> a -> f b
           combine ff a = (<*>) ff (g a)

This code is exceedingly polymorphic and is effectively asking GHC to generate
traversals over many different data types. From the info-table profiling we know
that ``combine`` is building up thunks of function applications. In the body of
``combine`` there are two function application sites: ``g a`` and ``(<*>) ff (g
a)``. To determine which is responsible we'll force each and rerun the
info-table profiling, beginning with ``<*> ff (g a)``:

.. code-block:: haskell

  combine :: Data a => f (a -> b) -> a -> f b
  combine ff a = let !res = (<*>) ff (g a) in res

Unfortunately, this produces the same profile. Let's next force ``g a``:

.. code-block:: haskell

  combine :: Data a => f (a -> b) -> a -> f b
  combine ff a = let !ga = (g a) in (<*>) ff ga

and rerun the test:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --test-show-details=streaming --enable-profiling --test-options='--pattern "implicit-conversion-test" +RTS -hi -i0.05 -l -rticky -RTS' --ghc-options='-eventlog -rtsopts -ticky -O2 -finfo-table-map -fdistinct-constructor-tables'
     ...
     Running 1 test suites...
     Test suite klister-tests: RUNNING...
     All tests
       Golden tests
         implicit-conversion-test: OK (1919.27s)

     All 1 tests passed (1919.29s)
     Test suite klister-tests: PASS

The test finished in 1919.27 seconds; clearly forcing this thunk produced a
regression. The heap profile similarly shows much more memory allocation:

.. raw:: html

         <iframe id="scaled-frame" scrolling="no" src="../../_static/klister/klister-eventlog-implicit-conversion-ipe-allscopeset_force_ga.html"></iframe>

Now this test allocates around 2.6Gb, unfortunately the info-table profiling
does not display the information for the most allocating info table address
``0x1b93550``. We'll do one last test and make both the entire body and ``g a``
strict:

.. code-block:: haskell

  combine :: Data a => f (a -> b) -> a -> f b
  combine ff a = let !ga = (g a)
                     !res = (<*>) ff ga
                     in res

.. code-block:: console

   Running 1 test suites...
   Test suite klister-tests: RUNNING...
   All tests
     Golden tests
       implicit-conversion-test: OK (1906.82s)

   All 1 tests passed (1906.84s)
   Test suite klister-tests: PASS

Not much better. We saw that ``combine`` was building up thunks with info-table
profiling, but by forcing those thunks the heap grew from 100Mb to 2.6Gb. So
even though info-table profiling pointed to ``allScopeSets``, our problem lies
elsewhere. If ``allScopeSets`` was the culprit then we would expect an
improvement, which was not observed. But we have learned that ``allScopeSets``
is on the critical path of the memory leak. We'll leave these changes in place
to determine what type of closures are newly leaking:

.. note::

   This is a common phenomena when plugging memory leaks. By adding strictness
   to the critical path the leak is on, it is often the case that the laziness
   moves to another part of system until the root cause is discovered. So by
   leaving these changes in place we are traversing the critical path that leads
   to the leak.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --enable-profiling --test-show-details=streaming  --test-options='--pattern "implicit-conversion-test" +RTS -hy -l-agu -p -L50 -RTS' --ghc-options='-eventlog -rtsopts -O2'

which yields:

.. raw:: html

         <iframe id="scaled-frame" scrolling="no" src="../../_static/klister/klister-eventlog-implicit-conversion-ipe-allscopeset_forced_hy.html"></iframe>

Almost all the memory allocated on the heap is a list ``[]`` of some type. Let's
inspect the code path for ``allScopeSets``, normally one would do a retainer
analysis to find the right code path, but in this case ``allScopeSets`` is only
called in one function: ``visit``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   visit :: ModuleName -> Expand Exports
   visit modName = do
     (m, es) <-
       do world <- view expanderWorld <$> getState
          case view (worldModules . at modName) world of
            Just m -> do
              let es = fromMaybe noExports $ view (worldExports . at modName) world
              return (m, es)
            Nothing ->
              inPhase runtime $
                loadModuleFile modName
     p <- currentPhase
     let i = phaseNum p
     visitedp <- Set.member p .
                 view (expanderWorld . worldVisited . at modName . non Set.empty) <$>
                 getState
     unless visitedp $ do
       let m' = shift i m -- Shift the syntax literals in the module source code
       sc <- freshScope $ T.pack $ "For module-phase " ++ shortShow modName ++ "-" ++ shortShow p
       let m'' = over ScopeSet.allScopeSets (ScopeSet.insertUniversally sc) m'
       evalResults <- inPhase p $ evalMod m''
       modifyState $
         set (expanderWorld . worldEvaluated . at modName)
             (Just evalResults)
       let bs = getModuleBindings m''
       modifyState $ over expanderGlobalBindingTable $ (<> bs)
     return (shift i es)
     where getModuleBindings (Expanded _ bs) = bs
           getModuleBindings (KernelModule _) = mempty

We see that ``allScopeSets`` *is only* used to construct ``m''``, by traversing
the data in ``m'``, and applying the function ``ScopeSet.insertUniversally``
with the argument ``sc``. Here is ``insertUniversally``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   insertUniversally :: Scope -> ScopeSet -> ScopeSet
   insertUniversally sc = set (universalScopes . at sc) (Just ())

and recall that a ``Scope`` is:

.. code-block:: haskell

   data Scope = Scope { scopeNum :: Int, scopePurpose :: Text }
     deriving (Data, Eq, Ord, Show)

which is created in ``freshScope``:

.. code-block:: haskell

   freshScope :: Text -> Expand Scope
   freshScope why = do
     n <- view expanderNextScopeNum <$> getState
     modifyState $ over expanderNextScopeNum $ (+ 1)
     return (Scope n why)

The ``Scope`` type is overly lazy and is inefficient. The ``Int`` is incremented
lazily in ``freshScope``, the ``Text`` is constructed lazily *and* is only used
for debugging in an error state [#]_. Furthermore, notice that the ``Eq`` and
``Ord`` instances are derived, which means the ``Text`` field is unnecessarily
scrutinized to insert and balance the ``Set`` even though the ordinal
information on the ``Text`` field is not useful to the interpreter. This is
especially problematic given the high entry counts we observed for
``isSubsetOf`` and ``allScopeSets``.

To fix the ``Scope`` type we'll make the ``Int`` field strict, remove the
``Text`` field entirely and inline ``freshScope`` . The ``Int`` field should be
strict to ensure the increments do not accumulate thunks and to make sure GHC
will unpack the ``Int``. We could choose to make the ``Text`` field strict, but
this would be a mistake because the ``Text`` field *is only* used in an error
state, so making it strict would mean allocating memory in a hot loop when it is
unnecessary to do so. Furthermore, removing the ``Text`` field unlocks better
data structures; with its removal we can use a ``newtype`` instead of a ``data``
type, thereby reducing allocations, and use an ``IntSet`` instead of a ``Set``.
An ``IntSet`` is similar to an ``IntMap`` (it is also implemented as a
big-endian PATRICIA trie) but the implementation in ``containers`` is tuned for
dense sets (where the elements are close in value), which is the kind of
``IntSet`` the klister interpreter generates.

The ``Text`` field is allocated in this line:

.. code-block:: haskell

   ...
       sc <- freshScope $ T.pack $ "For module-phase " ++ shortShow modName ++ "-" ++ shortShow p
   ...

We'll test that this is the source of the ``[]`` (due to the ``String``) by
forcing the ``Text`` object, and then rerun a closure type heap profile to
observe any changes:

.. code-block:: haskell

   ...
       sc <- freshScope $! T.pack $ "For module-phase " ++ shortShow modName ++ "-" ++ shortShow p
   ...

Notice, the strict application: ``$!``, after ``freshScope``. Here is the heap
profile:

.. raw:: html

         <iframe id="scaled-frame" scrolling="no" src="../../_static/klister/klister-eventlog-implicit-conversion-allscope-fixed.html"></iframe>

Much better, the interpreter is still leaking ``[]`` but the heap stays under
50Mb. We have found the memory leak. Now we'll go further and remove the
``Text`` field from ``Scope`` and change ``ScopeSet`` to use ``IntSet``. To
preserve the ability to debug we'll use a CPP pragma that includes the ``Text``
field for a debug build and elides it for a normal build. Here are the final
definitions:

.. code-block:: haskell

   -- Util.Set is an IntSet with more type information
   newtype Set key = Set { unSet :: IntSet }
     deriving newtype (Eq, Ord, Show, Semigroup, Monoid)
     deriving stock   Data
   type role Set representational

   -- In Scope.hs
   #ifndef KDEBUG
   newtype Scope = Scope { scopeNum :: Int}
     deriving newtype (Eq, Ord, Show, HasKey)
     deriving stock Data
   #else
   -- For a debug build Scope keeps a blob of text for debugging the expander
   -- output. This will have an impact of the performance of the interpreter so it
   -- won't be useful for performance issues
   data Scope = Scope { scopeNum :: Int, scopePurpose :: Text }
     deriving (Data, Eq, Ord, Show)
   #endif

   #ifndef KDEBUG
   freshScope :: Text -> Expand Scope
   {-# INLINE freshScope #-}
   freshScope _why = do
     n <- view expanderNextScopeNum <$> getState
     modifyState $ over expanderNextScopeNum (+ 1)
     return (Scope n)
   #else
   freshScope :: Text -> Expand Scope
   {-# INLINE freshScope #-}
   freshScope why = do
     n <- view expanderNextScopeNum <$> getState
     modifyState $ over expanderNextScopeNum (+ 1)
     return (Scope n why)
   #endif

Notice that the API to ``freshScope`` does not change. In total, there are 11
more call sites to ``freshScope`` throughout the interpreter that are leaking.
So if we had changed the API then the CPP would proliferate even more. To avoid
the extra CPP we inline ``freshScope``; this will ensure that in a non-debug
build GHC will determine that the ``Text`` argument is dead and remove it,
thereby clearing the memory leaks at each call site.

Now we'll revert the strictness changes in ``allScopeSets`` and check the
runtime of ``implicit-conversion-test`` to observe the effect of our
optimizations:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --test-show-details=streaming --test-options='--pattern "implicit-conversion-test"' --ghc-options='-O2'
     ...
     Test suite klister-tests: RUNNING...
     All tests
       Golden tests
         implicit-conversion-test: OK (1.10s)

     All 1 tests passed (1.11s)
     Test suite klister-tests: PASS

Much better, ``implicit-conversion-test`` is about nine times faster. Let's
rerun the entire test suite to check the progress we've made. Recall that the
testsuite originally took 38 seconds to finish.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cabal test --test-show-details=streaming --ghc-options='-O2'
     ...
     Test suite klister-tests: RUNNING...
     All tests
         Module tests
           Expected to succeed
             ...
             examples/lang.kl:                              OK (0.03s)
             examples/import.kl:                            OK (0.03s)
             examples/macro-body-shift.kl:                  OK (0.03s)
             examples/test-quasiquote.kl:                   OK (0.03s)
             examples/quasiquote-syntax-test.kl:            OK (0.03s)
             examples/hygiene.kl:                           OK (0.27s)
             examples/defun-test.kl:                        OK (0.02s)
             examples/fun-exports-test.kl:                  OK (0.03s)
       Golden tests
         test-quasiquote:                                   OK (0.03s)
         io:                                                OK (0.03s)
         defun-test:                                        OK (0.02s)
         contract:                                          OK (0.08s)
         int-ops:                                           OK (0.03s)
         implicit-conversion:                               OK (0.99s)
         implicit-conversion-test:                          OK (1.11s)
         higher-kinded-patterns:                            OK (0.39s)
         custom-literals-test:                              OK (0.20s)
         double-define:                                     OK (0.18s)
         custom-module-test:                                OK (0.22s)
         which-problem:                                     OK (0.24s)
         incorrect-context:                                 OK (0.02s)
         bound-vs-free:                                     OK (0.13s)
         meta-macro:                                        OK (0.08s)
         integer-syntax:                                    OK (0.03s)
         import:                                            OK (0.03s)

     All 124 tests passed (9.89s)
     Test suite klister-tests: PASS

The entire test suite finished in just under 10 seconds, or about as fast as
``implicit-conversion-test`` finished originally. ``implicit-conversion-test``
is also not the only test that benefited. Almost every test is faster; for
example, ``which-problem`` finishes in 240 ms compared to 820 ms,
``double-define`` finishes in 180 ms compared to 340 ms. Our work here is done
for now.


Summing up
----------

Our goal was to speed up the klister interpreter. To do so we found a poor
performing test and focused on the macro expander subsystem of the interpreter.
Then we employed a number of methods to find performance problems. We used:

* :ref:`Ticky Profiling <Ticky Chapter>`: To determine hot loops and highly
  allocating functions
* :ref:`Biographical/Retainer Profiling <Heap Profiling Chapter>`: To determine
  the source of memory leaks in the expander state. This technique led our
  analysis to the lazy return in ``currentEnv``.
* :ref:`Info-Table Profiling <IPE Chapter>`: To determine the line of code
  closures on the heap came from. This technique led our analysis to the
  ``visit`` function and ultimately to the leaky ``Text`` field ``Scope``.

Key to our analysis was a careful debugging process. We:

1. Found a reproducible test case.
2. Didn't guess, instead we looked: We used GHC's instrumentation to develop
   hypotheses about the klister interpreter's performance instead of guessing
   and performing `shotgun debugging
   <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shotgun_debugging>`_.
3. Only changed one thing at a time: We tried to only change a single function,
   or a single type at a time. Then, if we did not observe any difference with
   the instrumentation we reverted the change.

Could we have gone farther? Of course. The interpreter is still leaking ``[]``
even though the heap stays under 50Mb. In the end, the optimizations were
trivial; we only chose better data structures and closed memory leaks. We could
still optimize or memoize ``isSubsetOf``, unroll the ``Expander`` monad
transformer, fix the expander's use of the ``WriterT`` monad transformer; which
is well known to leak memory [#]_, do some manual loop fusion, or :ref:`oneShot
<OneShot Monad Chapter>` the expander monad. But for a first pass our results
are good enough.

.. [#] What I have in mind is a `Pareto Frontier
       <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareto_front#:~:text=In%20multi%2Dobjective%20optimization%2C%20the,is%20widely%20used%20in%20engineering.>`_
       for the interpreter.

.. [#] Based on data in the :haskellPerf:`Haskell Performance repository
       <dictionaries>`. This difference is on the order of a few nanoseconds for
       maps with 10 elements, grows to a difference of 1.2 microseconds at 1000
       elements. By 10000 elements ``IntMap`` consistently outperforms
       ``Data.Map``.

.. [#] We're eliding the code that shows this use case because it is
       uninteresting. Furthermore, the klister developers have confirmed this is
       the fields purpose.

.. [#] See the sequences comparison in the :haskellPerf:`Haskell Performance
       repository <sequences>`.

.. [#] The leakiness and excess laziness of ``Writer/WriterT`` have been well
        documented. See the Haskell mailing list `Stricter WriterT monad
        transformer
        <https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/libraries/2012-October/018599.html>`_
        and `Stricter WriterT (Part II)
        <https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/libraries/2013-March/019528.html>`_.
        This `blog post
        <https://journal.infinitenegativeutility.com/writer-monads-and-space-leaks>`_
        also has a good review.
